



Download Request: All Documents: 1-335
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:11:16 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(04/01/1995) and leq(06/30/1995)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

H. L. Stevenson, 65; Reporter at U.P.I. Became Top Editor

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 27;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 314 words


H. L. Stevenson, a former editor in chief of United Press International who
presided over the news service's coverage during the era of the Vietnam War and
Watergate, died on Thursday. He was 65 and lived in Rye, N.Y.

Mr. Stevenson had been in poor health since suffering a heart attack in
November, a family friend told U.P.I. He died at St. Joseph's Medical Center in
Stamford, Conn.

Mr. Stevenson spent 31 years working for U.P.I., becoming managing editor in
1965 and editor in chief and vice president in 1972. He oversaw coverage of the
Apollo moon landings, the Middle East and the energy crisis.

In 1972 and 1978, Mr. Stevenson and other U.P.I. executives visited China to
press for the reopening of Western news bureaus there. He wrote widely published
accounts of Chinese life under Communism and wrote articles on life in Cuba
under Fidel Castro after similar visits there during the early 1980's.

Mr. Stevenson was a trustee of the William Allen White Foundation, which
supports activities of the school of journalism at the University of Kansas, and
a Pulitzer Prize juror. For more than 10 years, he wrote the U.P.I. Reporter, a
weekly newsletter.

In 1983, Mr. Stevenson was promoted to executive vice president. In 1984, he
left the company and later became corporate editor of Crain Communications for
six years.

Born Nov. 23, 1929, in New Orleans, Hubert L. Stevenson grew up in Picayune,
Miss., where his first job in journalism was with the Picayune Item. He was an
infantry platoon sergeant from 1950 to 1952, and in 1953, he joined United Press
as a reporter in Jackson, Miss. In 1963, he became Southern Division news
manager, responsible for much of the coverage of the civil rights movement.

Mr. Stevenson is survived by his wife, the former LaVerne Harris, and a
daughter, Jennifer, a reporter for The St. Petersburg Times in Florida.

NAME: Hubert L. Stevenson

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: H. L. Stevenson (United Press International, 1983)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRIME

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 25;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words


Who were the Anasazi? What compelled them to carve their cities out of towering
desert cliffs? What forces of man or nature caused these ancient cliff dwellers
to vanish without a trace? Nevada Barr poses these confounding questions in ILL
WIND (Putnam, $19.95), the third novel in a brisk outdoor series with a National
Park Service ranger named Anna Pigeon as resident sleuth.

A strong, athletic woman with depths of sensitivity that she takes pains to
hide, Anna needs to leave civilization to find her peace. On her new assignment
at Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado, "it soothed her to be where the people
weren't," watching the wind and pondering the fate of the Anasazi. But there are
more immediate mysteries to solve: Who is sabotaging construction of the new
waterline? Why are people collapsing in Cliff Palace, the most spectacular of
the park's ruins? Who killed a ranger and laid out his body in one of the
ancient subterranean rooms?

Ms. Barr, who works as a ranger for the National Park Service, has an
intelligent answer to all these puzzles, if not to the older mysteries of the
Anasazi. But her stirring style is best illustrated by vibrant descriptions of
the order and disorder in the natural world. In vivid images of life (the aerial
gymnastics of hummingbirds) and death (a desiccated corpse in the desert), she
shows us the very face of nature.

In a world where values are constantly shifting and slipping, John Cuddy hangs
on to his code of honor with the ferocity of those bold knights of yore.
Jeremiah Healy puts Cuddy through his most rigorous test of valor in RESCUE
(Pocket Books, $20) when the Boston private eye impulsively makes a promise to a
young runaway.

Cuddy befriends 10-year-old Eddie and his teen-age protector, Melinda, when
their old junker breaks down on a New Hampshire highway. It's plain that the
kids are in trouble, but Cuddy doesn't know the half of it until Eddie
disappears and Melinda is fished out of the harbor in South Boston. With the
help of an honest cop in New Hampshire and Vietnam War buddies from all over, he
traces the boy to a Florida church camp run by an evangelical minister.
"Sincere, and perhaps the greatest stage presence I'd ever seen live," Cuddy
says, "but absolutely stark, raving nuts."

Although Mr. Healy's high-minded detective turns into a guerrilla fighter for
this rough and bloody adventure, the workout doesn't rattle his brains. Shrewdly
sizing up the preacher's evil design for lost boys like Eddie, Cuddy plots his
daring rescue action like a military maneuver. It may seem strange to find this
compassionate hero hauling out the heavy artillery, but even the gentlest
knights have to sharpen their swords.

Some people just pull trouble behind them like a little red wagon. In WRITTEN IN
BLOOD (Morrow, $22), another slyly amusing whodunit from Caroline Graham,
trouble trundles into the stodgy English village of Midsomer Worthy on the heels
of a semifamous author who has come to address a local group of would-be
writers.

The modest author charms the amateur scribblers with his mild encouragement and
diplomatic criticism. But his presence inexplicably unhinges the club secretary,
who is found bashed to a pulp the morning after the literary soiree. The
distraught members of the Midsomer Worthy Writers' Circle have a collective
breakdown, and it falls to Chief Inspector Tom Barnaby, the sage of this series,
to poke and pry into the shameful secrets that are stuffed in people's closets.

Ms. Graham wraps her story in the dry, close atmosphere of the classic village
mystery, but her droll sense of humor keeps her from taking the cozy genre
conventions too seriously. A satirist by stylistic inclination, she goes
straight for the social bullies who tyrannize small towns. Although the tooth
marks left on these characters tend to limit the suspect pool, this is a
technical lapse that can be overlooked, given the author's nimble imagination
and the smooth polish of her prose.

"Write what you know." Most authors pay some mind to that literary directive.
But Parnell Hall -- a sometime actor, onetime private detective and full-time
writer of novels and screenplays -- really runs with it in MOVIE (Mysterious
Press/ Warner, $19.95) when he introduces his series sleuth to the crazy
business of film making.

Appealingly inept as an ambulance chaser for a New York shyster, Stanley
Hastings has even worse luck as a first-time screenwriter. Within minutes of
selling his script for a murder mystery and courtroom drama called "Trial by
Fire" to a hustling producer-director, Stanley finds himself agreeing to rewrite
the thing as "Hands of Havoc, Flesh of Fire" -- "a karate movie with four hot
babes" and a showy role for a "nerdy twerp superstar." The deflated writer
figures that this is as low as it gets. Wrong. Once the movie starts shooting,
at various locations around New York, the production is plagued by equipment
failures, near accidents and sudden deaths.

Mr. Hall scores some good laughs with his sendups of obsessive movie folk and
their narcissistic ways. His novel might also be instructive for readers who
burn to learn who's who and what's what on a low-budget movie. But the author
must have phoned in his plot, which is static and talky and a disservice to
Stanley, who hunches around in the background, endlessly rewriting his script.

BURN (Holt, $22.50) is the latest scorcher in John Lutz's tropical series about
a Florida private eye who can take the heat. Fred Carver's new client, an
attractive, widowed housing developer with the "guileless blue eyes" of a serial
killer, claims he is being persecuted by a woman who has accused him of stalking
her. Keeping an open mind, Carver sets out to determine whether the frantic
businessman is your "typical compulsive male sexual psychopath" or a
much-maligned guy.

Over the course of this perplexing investigation, Carver keeps shifting
positions on his client and the accuser. Although the detective finds her to be
"an unusually quiet and well-behaved woman," she also strikes him as a person of
odd, irregular habits. Like Carver, the reader is kept in suspenseful
ambivalence about the characters, who bob and weave and blow a lot of smoke
before revealing themselves in the small, subtle details that ultimately define
identity.

Mr. Lutz uses the same technique to fill in the textures of his setting -- a
landscape of dusty trailer parks, dirty auto interiors and sidewalks so hot they
soften shoe leather. Carver knows how to read these runes. One quick look at a
plastic crucifix hanging above a television set and alongside a mounted
semiautomatic, and there it is: "Florida in a nutshell."

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE EMASCULATION OF SPORTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE;   Robert Lipsyte, a Times columnist, is author, with
Peter Levine, of the forthcoming "Idols of the Game."

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 51;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5139 words


BASEBALL HAS DONE US A FAVOR. IT'S about time we understood that staged
competitive sports events -- and baseball can stand for all the games -- are no
longer the testing ground of our country's manhood and the theater of its once
seemingly limitless energy and power.

As a mirror of our culture, sports now show us spoiled fools as role models,
cities and colleges held hostage and games that exist only to hawk products. The
pathetic posturing of in-your-face macho has replaced a once self-confident
masculinity.

And the truth and beauty of sport itself -- a pleasure of the flesh to the
participant, an ennobling inspiration to the spectator -- seem to have been
wiped off the looking glass.

Perhaps sports were never anything more than a dreamland for the fan. Still, for
most of the American century, the arena offered dreams of hope and purpose. The
values of sport -- honoring boundaries, playing by the rules, working together
for a common goal, submitting to authority -- were the same values that shaped
the American character for the long, winning season that began during the
bare-knuckle boxing days when the Western frontier closed. Sometime around the
first Super Bowl, in the middle of the Vietnam War, that season began to lose
its steam.

And now it has ended, not with a Mike Tyson bang or a Tonya Harding whimper but
with a commercial interruption. Those mugger barons, the baseball owners, made
clear that they regard the stars of their so-called national pastime as
commodities, overpriced jerks, a different species. For years we had been edging
toward these conclusions ourselves during barroom seminars and on talk radio.
Now it's official.

So it's only a game, we are told, and anyone can play. Those who claimed title
to the ultimate stamp of prime American beef -- "big leaguer" -- turned out to
be nothing but specialty acts with union minimums. Sports are another variety
show, almost as volatile as talk shows, almost as dramatic as Court TV. The
athlete-performers are clearly no longer the "muscular Christians" who first
seized the national imagination.

That's why America doesn't like them so much anymore.

The problem is, they don't stand for anything beyond themselves. We had come to
expect more somehow, finding inspiration in the dignity and integrity we thought
we saw in Joe DiMaggio, Jackie Robinson, Bill Russell, Muhammad Ali.

It is harder to find inspiration, for instance, in Michael Jordan's shuttles
between basketball and baseball, especially when we know that the same team
owner and the same shoe company are behind him in both sports and that the
politics of capital and labor may have more to do with his decisions than the
love of challenge and competition. Just by taking a new basketball jersey number
(the old one had been retired), he created a sporting-goods bonanza.

We have come to see that Jordan, Troy Aikman and Ken Griffey Jr. have nothing to
offer us beyond the gorgeous, breathtaking mechanics of what they do. And it's
not enough, now that there is no longer a dependable emotional return beyond the
sensation of the moment itself. The changes in sports -- the moving of
franchises, free agency -- have made it impossible to count on a player, a team,
an entire league still being around for next year's comeback. The connection
between player and fan has been irrevocably destabilized, for love and loyalty
demand a future. Along the way, those manly virtues of self-discipline,
responsibility, altruism and dedication seem to have been deleted from the
athletic contract with America.

SO A PLAGUE ON BOTH locker-room and skybox, we say, and yet, perhaps, this is
not a sign of giving up, but of liberation. Although sports was a sustaining
myth, and there will be the inevitable sense of loss, we should feel triumphant
-- certainly better than we now do. For the end of sports as we knew them is
also the end of what has become a delusion. We can abandon our belief in the
ball park as the country's true melting pot; it is no longer the place where our
children learn courage and self-control, where our elderly find comforting
nostalgia and where our immigrants discover shortcuts to the heart of the
country.

Once upon a time, we could imagine that heart. It was center field in Yankee
Stadium, a patch of grass glistening in the sunshine of Afternoon in America.

It is the 50's, and the quintessential American sports hero, Mickey Mantle,
rides the lawn, our cowboy in the outfield, helping us feel good about
ourselves. The values of the sports arena -- teamwork, sacrifice, victory above
all -- have brought us triumphant through World War II, just as they were
supposed to, and into a time of prosperity. And Mantle, wearing lucky No. 7, the
Oklahoma Kid with his booming bat and sunny smile, seems a promise of all the
afternoons to come on a planet we would democratize, tame, teach fair play.

For some, it was the last good time. One of our most engaging baseball
storytellers, Bob Costas, chokes up remembering himself in 1959, 7 years old,
walking out to center field after a game, holding his father's hand. Mantle
hadn't even played that day, but he is intrinsic to Costas's memory of his
connection to his father, to the promise of his young life, to a seamless sports
history that included the lovable Babe Ruth, the noble DiMaggio and the
passionate Robinson, who starred in what was the century's greatest feel-good
sports moment, despite its cynical undertones.

We somehow chose to ignore what might discomfort us in each of these stories --
that Robinson's legacy was overwhelmed by the owners' greed for the new black
market, that Ruth's bed and board manners were disgusting, that DiMaggio's
domestic life had its dark side. Was it only that we didn't allow open season on
celebrities in those days, or did we really need to protect ourselves from the
knowledge that these heroes were just us, only larger? Probably both. We
followed the games through the rose-colored prism of sportswriters who played
down the seamy side lest they lose their free meals and tickets, and access --
it was the ball clubs who picked up the train fares while scribes and athletes
rode together, played cards together, winked together at each others' manly
peccadilloes.

And for the fan, the ballplayers were also accessible, living in the same
middle-class neighborhoods and bringing home about the same paychecks that we
did. We believed that they truly loved what they were doing, that they would do
it for free, as would we. Back then, we might boo them, but we'd rarely throw
anything hard. After a bad loss, we might even want to hug them with our eyes
and yell, "You'll get 'em tomorrow!" They would stay with the same team until
they were hurt or, in the perfect meritocracy of sport, replaced with a younger
model. Unions, after all, were for mere mortals willing to trade their mediocre
lives for job security.

The team owners, meanwhile, while rich and stuffy, appeared to be true sportsmen
who loved the game as much as we did. The only difference was capital -- we
bought the trading cards of the people they bought.

We ignored the dark clouds in that 50's afternoon sky. Costas's sensitive
interview of Mantle last year, just after Mantle had left the Betty Ford Center,
was a kind of closure for the boomer generation. He talked about being drunk and
hung over through much of his career -- insecure, fearful, an admittedly poor
father and husband. He had let us all down almost as much as he had let himself
down. Not such a manly symbol after all.

And the owners, we discovered, weren't ever such great fans of the game. While
they were preaching baseball as our religion, they were practicing real estate,
demanding that we support their teams by buying more tickets or, better yet, by
swallowing the tax hikes that would buy them new stadiums. If we weren't good
sports about it, they would just pack up their game and take it elsewhere. The
relocation of the Dodgers and Giants to California in 1957 was jarring, but it
was just an early tremor compared to the earthquakes to follow.

In the 36 years since little Bobby Costas first walked his field of dreams,
society at large underwent more transformation than did sports. The viciousness
of the reaction against equal rights for women and people of color shook our
image of American fair play. As our highest elected officials and business
giants turned out to be masters of deceit, we lost confidence in leadership. And
in losing the Vietnam War, America lost the vision of itself as a winning
gunfighter nation. To shore up our crumbling sense of self, we turned to sports.
Outfielder Nation, Linebacker Nation, even Power Forward Nation showed off the
muscular mementos of what we thought we had been. But the inevitable couldn't be
forestalled indefinitely. Vietnam had punched out the lights of manhood. By
1995, the loss would be complete.

CONSIDER BOXING, THE MANLIEST OF SPORTS. THE BOXING INDUSTRY, late-night comedy
with blood, now eagerly anticipates the return of the only heavyweight champion
in memory who was equally famous for his knockout punch and his incredible lack
of success with women. Be she wife or pick-up, a woman was continually cooking
Iron Mike Tyson in his own soup of suspicion, ignorance, clumsiness, brutality.
From John L. Sullivan to Muhammad Ali, our champs may have been roughnecks and
philanderers, but they were, well, manly. They provided an example, however
warped it may seem in retrospect, for the sons of immigrants and slaves of how
to make it in America with nothing but their hands and heart. None of those
champs let their wives drag them on television with Barbara Walters, drugged and
silly and apologetic, and they didn't rooster through beauty contests until they
found a teen-ager to rape. Both Sullivan and Ali, the Great and the Greatest,
taunted their opponents in the ring, but they never threatened to "make
girlfriends" out of them, like Tyson did. The heavyweight champ, you may recall,
was once considered Mr. Man, the toughest guy on the planet, the alpha male whom
the betas wanted to hunch around for some trickle-down testosterone.

So who wants to be like Mike? Well, plenty of young men do. He's a hero, all
right, but of a new standard -- an emblem of their real or imagined oppression,
of "she set me up." Beyond that, Tyson proved yet again that if you're a true
power boy, you're allowed to run wild, get caught and come back ready to rock
again.

As did Richard Nixon, Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken and Marion Barry, among
others, comeback kids all.

If Iron Mike represents one end of the modern male spectrum, then David
Williams, an offensive tackle for the Houston Oilers, is the other. Two seasons
ago, Williams missed a game so he could be with his wife for the birth of their
first child. The outpouring of acclaim for Williams seemed very progressive in
the beginning, very 90's, the best of political correctness and modern
parenting. Even though one of his coaches likened Williams's decision to dodging
combat in World War II, his teammates thought he did the right thing. (They
weren't going to the Super Bowl anyway.) Williams's father said, "He's proved to
me he is a real man," and many women's groups were ready to make him Dad of the
Decade before he even changed a diaper.

But many male fans felt justifiably confused, even betrayed, by Williams's daddy
track. Wasn't football a symbolic reconstitution of the platoon, the posse, the
work gang, the factory line, where real men knew they could count on one another
to cover their backs? It was a preparation for war, remember. Did anyone slip
out of the Alamo on paternity leave? If Williams wanted to be such a sensitive
modern male, why was he playing football? Why was he still a beef-bag lineman
trying to hurt other men for money?

Perhaps one reason there was such a positive reaction in some quarters to
Williams's decision was that it ran counter to our perception of the athlete
running amok off the field. And with good reason. J. Morrow, a psychology
professor at Iona College who tests professional baseball and football players,
has found higher levels of aggressive, even antisocial tendencies among athletes
than among the general public. And a Boston-based researcher, Jeffrey R.
Benedict, has concluded that sports may actually condition male athletes to
antisocial behavior. He is one of several people mining police and court records
for what seems to be a disproportionate number of sexual assaults by individual
high-school, college and professional athletes, and gang rapes by team members.
"There's a real make-it-while-you-can, sex-and-money attitude in sports, and
it's not so different from music, acting, maybe some aspects of politics,"
Benedict says. "But there's a special factor here. Some of our best athletes are
trained in violence and deception, and they just can't turn it on and off when
we want them to. And given the money involved, coaches and owners might not want
to risk them losing their edge for the game."

THAT EDGE WAS ALWAYS THERE, BUT FOR MOST OF THE century it was being sharpened
for a higher cause. Sports were promoted as the crucible of American manhood,
the arena in which the best and the biggest acted out the psychodramas that
would prepare them to be world leaders, C.E.O.'s and the autocrats of their own
breakfast tables. Football was created at elite universities, after all, so that
the brainy heirs of the Yankee founders didn't go off to read poetry and catch
butterflies; they needed to practice butting heads, fighting common foes. Teddy
Roosevelt saw football as training for the "strenuous life," an important
"preparation to do work that counts when the time arises."

In the beginning, this was considered an absolute necessity. After the closing
of the Western frontier in 1890, there was no place left for American men to
transform themselves into the stalwarts who would keep democracy alive and lead
the country to global greatness. No more real redskins and bears to test our
mettle. So sport became the new frontier, "the safety valve of an overworked
nation," as one writer exclaimed; "artificial adventure, artificial colonizing,
artificial war," as another put it, that would produce "a better-formed race."

And while that race was supposed to be white, and of Anglo-Saxon origin, it was
the immigrant waves that filled the ball parks. Sports -- playing them, watching
them, gabbing about them on the assembly line, encouraging your son to play --
was the quickest ticket to becoming an American. The buried prize in
SportsWorld's Cracker Jack box has always been the promise that if you buy into
America's games, your sons will grow up strong and straight; it was considered
inconceivable that a strong man wouldn't be straight.

This was never a secret agenda. Knute Rockne, the Notre Dame coach who made
college football a spectacle in the 20's, loved to regale boosters with a
flouncy, homophobic routine envisioning a future in which reformers managed to
emasculate football. There would be "gaily clad" players prancing in
"purple-mauvette tunics . . . the hosiery specially designed with beige tasseled
garters by Patou, perfume by Houbigant." The big game would be lost on a freak
play, with a running back named Bickerdash pulling up just shy of the end zone
when he noticed a run in his stocking.

No wonder Babe Ruth was hailed as the burly beau ideal of working-class American
manhood, the happy hedonist for an America trying to dump its puritanism,
justify the culture of abundance and shake a stick at the world. Beyond selling
a "pastime" to the masses, Ruth also sold the Credo of the Home Run: A man can
never be faulted, even if he's wrong, for the bold, aggressive action in pursuit
of victory; a real man must be willing to strike out, to go down swinging. And
as long he hit well enough for the fans and filled enough seats for the owners,
his similarly high batting averages in food, drink, sex and antisocial behavior
were casually posted in the boys-will-be-boys box score. It was part of the
game.

And how did women fit into this game? Not comfortably. If they didn't look,
dress and play cute, they were assumed to be lesbians, semi-men or dateless.
Ruth's female counterpart, both in fame and accomplishment, was Mildred (Babe)
Didrikson, whose amazing golf and basketball skills and 1932 Olympic gold medals
in track were characterized by one important sportswriter, Paul Gallico, as "a
compensation . . . she would not or could not compete with women at their own
best game -- man-snatching."

In the early 50's, Didrikson was the star of the Ladies Professional Golf
Association Tour, which gave women their first real opportunity to have careers
in sport, like men. But the way she conducted herself -- as self-absorbed, crude
and commercial as Babe Ruth -- created an archetype of the female athlete that
men, threatened by her energy and talent, could dismiss as less than womanly.

By the late 60's, female athletes became harder to dismiss, in large part thanks
to Billie Jean King. She was as brave, merry, outspoken and commercial as the
old Babes -- and as her male counterpart, the New York Jets quarterback Joe
Namath. These two were the new signposts of gender and sexuality within sports;
not only did they popularize their respective games, but they also seemed to
redefine the roles of men and women. King was a "normal woman" who happened to
be a great athlete while Namath was a great athlete in touch with his feminine
side. Or were they?

The young Billie Jean Moffitt was able to pre-empt media speculation about her
sexuality for many years by marrying at 21, in 1965. On the tennis court, she
became Mrs. King. While she advanced Didrikson's campaign to create careers for
female athletes, she also helped men by moving tennis out of the "shamateur"
period, during which most players took money under the table from the officials
who controlled the sport. As professionals, male tennis players became more
"manly," no longer the kept pets of the country club set. Of course, female
players became more traditionally manly, too, mercenaries with a greater measure
of career control.

But King's influence was damaged in 1981 when a lesbian relationship was
revealed in the course of a palimony case. She had used her marriage as a beard,
understanding that the corporate world, which had heartily embraced her,
wouldn't have done so if it knew she was a lesbian. While boy Babes can sleep
with as many women as they can fit around their home and road schedules, girl
Babes' sex lives are far more circumscribed. As Martina Navratilova has pointed
out, any female athlete who slept with 2,000 partners, as Magic Johnson claimed
he did, much less the 20,000 of whom Wilt Chamberlain boasted, would be
considered a slut, not a league leader. As far as the gender of those partners,
neither male nor female athletes are allowed to stray from the prescribed norm.
(Consider Navratilova herself, who, for all her championship titles, was denied
a proper share of corporate sponsorships because of her homosexuality.)

Back when King was storming the clubhouse, Namath was prancing on its roof. On
one hand, he was a blatant heterosexual who would have made Rockne laugh with
the greedy daring of his panty hose commercial. (The Bickerdash joke was still
alive.) And yet Namath cried in public, let his hair grow, diminished the
importance of the Big Game with his endorsements of pregame booze and casual
sex, and flaunted his brown fur coat like any leading lady. He was the Madonna
of his time, especially by 1969, when he guaranteed a Super Bowl victory for his
underdog team, and delivered.

He was also completely misunderstood. Like any other Pennsylvania steel-mill
kid, he just wanted to have some laughs with his buddies in the comfortably
misogynist locker room. But during the Vietnam War, when enemies of the state
were everywhere (Namath made Nixon's "enemies list," identified incorrectly as a
Giant), a football player with long hair was perceived as a rebel, a threat to
traditional male authority. What a joke. Only last year Namath said, "There are
no sissies in the arena."

WHILE THE ROLES OF MEN AND WOMEN IN SPORTS WERE becoming less defined, at least
on the surface, the stakes were getting higher. Roone Arledge of ABC emerged as
the Homer of an enormously profitable televised mythology that brought us epic
battles in slo-mo and instant replay. The artificial adventures of "Wide World
of Sports" and the artificial wars of "Monday Night Football" transformed gamins
and Gargantuas into living-room gods, their every move -- on and off the field
-- under constant surveillance.

The bounty on fresh heroes grew so rich that certain universities corrupted
themselves by retooling for "revenue sports" and certain poor neighborhoods
became fishing pools for talent. The cynicism of the chase after black "scholar
athletes" became a national hoop nightmare. The system has exploited underclass
black athletes, who brought with them the intimidating ghetto style of poor men
who feel under constant assault, who can't take their masculine prerogatives for
granted. They become the erratic sneaker salesmen who talk trash to cover the
insecurities caused by illiteracy, looming felony raps and the psychological
battering of their predominantly white coaches, who juggle all-male
dysfunctional families to win at any cost.

And as manhood turns into an ever mushier concept, a sport like women's college
basketball becomes all the more appealing; its reliance on finesse and teamwork
reminds us of the possibility of collective play, as opposed to the male game's
dunk-and-howl. But what happens when all the women now coming into the arena
begin to exhibit the same killer instincts that we thought were exclusive to
men? With more and more male coaches taking over women's teams, aren't the
athletes being turned over to a new generation of Bob Knights and Pat Rileys? Is
this what everybody meant by equal rights?

Women are already beginning to show the strain: anorexic gymnasts, 15-year-olds
burned out by tennis daddies and swimmers who are sexually exploited by male
coaches. If and when women's basketball goes over the top, imagine the toll.

A new American class has emerged, beyond gender, social standing or race. Call
it a gladiatorial class. Families, schools, towns wave 12-year-olds through the
toll booths of life. Potential sports stars -- who might bring fame and money to
everyone around them -- are excused from taking out the trash, from learning to
read, from having to ask, "May I touch you there?" No wonder so many of them
grow into the confused, sometimes self-destructive "role models" whose
sexual-abuse trials and drug busts have become the new cliches of the sports
page. We are amused but not moved by the outrageous posturing of Charles Barkley
of the Phoenix Suns; we sense he is trying to differentiate himself from the
affable Jordan only so he can capture his own multimillion-dollar market niche.
We are mildly interested but not surprised at the seven drug-related suspensions
of Steve Howe, the Yankees' relief pitcher; we are also sophisticated enough to
question the club's motivation for mercy -- is it an enlightened attitude toward
addiction or simply the need for a quick fix in the bullpen?

The wonder is that there haven't been more incidents, that a designated hitter
hasn't yet led the heart of the order into the stands to clean out a nest of
hecklers or that a Final Four team hasn't refused to take the court until CBS
came up with $50,000 for each man's mother.

The truth is that most athletes are still conservative and obedient to
authority, yet trapped by their upbringing in a state of perpetual adolescence.
Most tend to be pleasant enough if you aren't shrieking for an autograph or a
quote. They are probably more competent than athletes of the past and no more
unidimensional than, say, the average ballet dancer or rocket scientist.

But while we may still envy them, even celebrate them, we stopped liking them.
And this began well before the extended rain delay in baseball this year. By the
end of the 1987 football strike, when the players began barreling through their
own picket lines, it dawned on America that these heroic brothers didn't have
the stand-up solidarity of meatpackers and miners and hospital workers, male or
female. These prancing, steroid-bloated, coke-snorting headbangers turned out to
be Bickerdashes -- or sissies, if the word could be narrowed to Namath's meaning
of a coward, someone who cuts and runs. For all the sportswriters' stories about
modern athletes' "courage" after surgery (that's usually an arthroscopic knee
procedure, not cancer) or "rising from dire poverty" (on a free ride to a major
university), these guys suddenly appeared to be something short of men.

SO WHO'S A SISSY NOW?

Certainly not Greg Louganis, a homosexual ("toughest sissy on the planet," quips
Eric Marcus, the co-writer of Louganis's best-selling autobiography) whose 10th
dive in the 1988 Seoul Olympics' springboard preliminaries was the nerviest act
I ever covered in sports. On the previous dive, he had banged his head against
the board; the wound needed several quick stitches, no time for anesthetic. A
few minutes later, he came back to nail the dive, perhaps the best of the Games.
It was a textbook example of traditional manly heroism. The recent debate over
whether Louganis should have told Olympic officials that he was H.I.V.-positive
at the time has obscured the pure courage of his act, to say nothing of the fact
that he went on to win two gold medals in those Games.

The real sissy is O. J. Simpson. A jury will decide whether it thinks he killed
his ex-wife and her friend, but we already know he slapped her around. O. J.
beat his wife. That's a sissy thing to do, especially if you are bigger than she
is. If you were also one of the greatest running backs in football history,
powerful and elusive plus handsome and charming, such behavior calls into
question not only your character but the character of those who determinedly
avoided dealing with the truth. O. J. became an all-star Babe for his ability to
make the dominant culture comfortable; funny and self-deprecating, he could make
the soft white men who clustered around him in bars and television studios --
call them syco-fans -- actually feel studly. They loved to wink at his "roguish"
ways with women, the I-can-handle-it quality of his substance abuse and the
sheer arrogance of his style. SportsWorld gave the big dog permission to act
this way, and he became a shining inspiration to all the little dogs.

But the ultimate sissy is the male sports fan still hung on the romance of a
SportsWorld that never quite existed, a psychic theme park of courage and
tragedy and revenge and redemption that was rolled out every season by sissy
sportswriters who were willing to be treated with contempt by athletes in return
for a few minutes inside that male clubhouse. Few wrote the truth because it
would lose them that access, along with their readers. What traditional sports
fans really want is to wallow in a sweaty Oz where a man can avoid his family in
a socially acceptable bliss-state, quaff his Macho Lite and pretend to care
deeply about something that makes few real demands beyond lip service. So
whaddya think of them Knicks, buddy?

AND NOW IT'S OVER. WHICH IS NOT TO SAY, YOU understand, that staged competitive
sports events are going to follow silent movies into the museum or become a cult
pleasure, like opera. On the contrary: the athletic entertainment industry is
booming and there will be more and more promotable superstars, pay-per-view
games, heavy gambling, in-your-face commercials, salary holdouts, Gucci seats
filled with syco-fan celebrities, teams moving to new cities or holding old ones
for ransom. There will be more of everything, and it will all be more exciting,
available, expensive. And although the faux manliness it seems to stimulate --
the chest-thumping, tobacco-chewing and crotch-grabbing (only Roseanne, who
mocked it, can't get away with it) -- will also continue for a while, it will
represent nothing more than the desperate last thrashes of the dying dragon's
tail.

Sports are over because they no longer have any moral resonance. They are merely
entertainment, the bread and circuses of a New Rome. Nothing makes this more
chillingly real than our current Babes: Mike Tyson and Tonya Harding. Two of the
neediest, hungriest, most troubled and misguided young people in athletic
history, they are the archetypal extremes of this frenzied, confused sports
endgame.

Tyson, the Frankenstein monster of aggression, was plucked from a correctional
facility by the old boxing trainer Cus D'Amato and shaped to win a championship.
Harding, the trailer-park Cinderella, made herself a skating star but was
betrayed by a leech of a husband who didn't trust her to win on her own.

If we still believed in sports, neither Tyson nor Harding would ever darken our
arenas again. Despite our blood lust, how could we dare risk crowning a
convicted rapist as male champion of the world? Despite the way her edginess
aroused us, how could we ever trust this clumsy cheat not to spoil another
promise of fair play?

But since we don't believe anymore, it may not really matter. Instead of sports,
we will happily root for human cartoons competing in athletic theme parks fueled
without apology by violent thrills and endorsement dollars. We will buy team
jerseys by color, not name. We will demand honest effort and drug-free play only
because we need to feel that we can gamble with confidence. And for the same
reason that we buy lottery tickets, we will urge our sons and daughters to go
for the gold.

It's late in the American game and hope for the home team fades. Does it still
matter if Mighty Casey strikes out? Sports no longer reflect the America of our
dreams, and the stars of sport are no longer the idealized versions of
ourselves. Casey is just out for himself and the owners can be counted on only
to betray him, us, all of Mudville. If that mirror is truly reflecting who and
what we are now, we are selfish, short-sighted, morally bankrupt, approaching
impotence. It is baseball that has brought us to this place, and as we turn away
from it, we should thank the former pastime for finally teaching us that it
really is only a game. Our only hope of winning in these painful final innings
is to tilt the mirror away from sport and toward the heroes who can truly hang
tough, go long and hit for distance. Parents, teachers, nurses -- people like
us.

After all, Mighty Casey didn't even bother to strike out; he just went out on
strike.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; Idol Worship -- Joe DiMaggio in the 40's, on his way into the
Hall of Fame and American hearts. (ARCHIVE PHOTOS); Mike Tyson in 1991, on his
way to court. (TOM STRATTMAN/SIPA PRESS)(pg. 50-51); Going, Going, Gone -- Babe
Ruth was seen as the perfect hero, despite his hoggish behavior (THE NEW YORK
TIMES); Darryl Strawberry has fallen off the pedestal, despite his Ruthian
swing. (MITCHELL LAYTON/DUOMO)(pg. 52-53); Girls Will Be Boys -- In the 30's,
Babe Didrikson's athleticism was derided as "manly." (THE NEW YORK TIMES); Tonya
Harding lost a lace at the 1994 Olympics. Her sense of fair play was already
missing. (BILL EPPRIDGE/SPORTS ILLUSTRATED)(pg. 54-55); The Mirror Cracked -- In
1942 baseball fans looked heavenward, as "muscular Christians" played on the
field (BETTMANN ARCHIVES); By 1990 sports teams were getting the fans they
deserved. (JOHN MCDONOUGH/SPORTS ILLUSTRATED)(pg. 56-57)


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS/ARTIFACTS;
Tired of Chinese? Try Vietnamese

BYLINE: By RITA REIF

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 45;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 847 words


ERIC J. ZETTERQUIST, A 32year-old art dealer, may be on to something with
"Vietnamese Ceramics," the current show at his Manhattan gallery. Eager for
trade with the West, Vietnam is becoming a hot destination for tourists with an
appetite for the exotic. Devotees of Asian art are also discovering an
alternative to the better known and more costly works from China, Japan and
Korea.

Mr. Zetterquist is by no means alone in his interest in Vietnamese artifacts. As
a part of its auction on June 5, Christie's in London will sell 50 pieces of
Vietnamese stoneware from a European collection. And a book, to be published
next year, will document examples of these ceramics in public and private
collections worldwide.

The star of Mr. Zetterquist's show, which runs through April 14 at the gallery
that bears his name on East 81st Street near Madison Avenue, is a 16th-century
parrot-shaped jug. Until recently, most pottery buffs had no idea such vessels
were made in Vietnam during that period. The jug's spirited decoration -- the
parrot's wicked eyes, pert beak, deftly painted feathers and shapely tail -- is
the sort of offbeat piece coveted by today's collectors long accustomed to the
more sedate Chinese ceramics.

"This spontaneity is not seen in Chinese pieces," he said of the works from
Vietnam. "In China, the court dictated the decoration on all Imperial wares. And
often the same images of dragons and peonies were duplicated on non-Imperial
wares."

The show focuses on the finest period of Vietnamese ceramics. The 34 pieces on
view were produced between the 11th and 16th centuries -- after the end of
China's 1,000-year domination and before the European colonization began.

For most of this 500-year period, the kingdom of Vietnam, one-third the size of
today's Vietnam, remained independent. This autonomy was reflected in the free
style its ceramists developed, working at kilns near Hanoi. Unlike those in
China, some of the best pots were painted or incised with exuberantly drawn
birds, flowers, fish and landscapes. Others were covered with crackled ash
glazes the texture of parchment, as can be seen on a pumpkin-shaped jar with a
ruff of lotus petals around its mouth.

There are other differences, especially in the colors. Some of the finest
Vietnamese ceramics are glazed a chocolate brown, a color used in 12th-century
China on Song ceramics but uncommon in other periods. The show's most memorable
example is a thinly potted bowl the shape and color of a bronze vessel. Many
pieces of blue-and-white or brown-and-white stoneware are enlivened by reds,
yellows or greens.

Compared with those from China, these vessels are often more subdued in
coloring. One reason was that the cobalt used to create blue was applied as
sparingly in Vietnam as it was in Korea -- because both countries imported the
costly pigment. Even when the palette was paler, Vietnamese artists applied
color with sweeping flourishes, a zest not often seen on Chinese pieces. A case
in point is a brown-and-white plate embellished at the center with a lively
fish, its fins and tail flapping, as if its body were whipping through water.

Mr. Zetterquist found the ceramics in the show over the last year in Europe and
Singapore. The earlier pieces were probably excavated in the 1930's and 1940's
in Vietnam, he says. Much of what survives of the material made from the 14th
century on was exported to lands throughout the Pacific or Europe. Five pieces,
produced in the 15th century, were uncovered more recently in shipwrecks. The
artifacts in the show range in price from $1,800 for a cobalt blue box to
$22,000 for the parrot-shaped jug.

Similarly priced Vietnamese ceramics have been appearing increasingly in
galleries and auctions in New York, London and Paris. In 1984, a 15th-century
blue-and-white jar was bought by Seijiro Matsuoka, a Japanese real estate
investor, at Christie's in London for $130,680, a record for Vietnamese
ceramics. It is now part of the Matsuoka Museum in Tokyo.

The new book by John Stevenson, a Seattle collector, and John Guy, the curator
of Southeast Asian art at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, is the first
on the subject. A retired British businessman, Mr. Stevenson, who had collected
Chinese ceramics for decades, became interested in Vietnamese pieces during
trips to the country in the 1980's. He is part of the most recent wave of
collectors in this century.

Mr. Stevenson was drawn by the "relaxed style" of Vietnamese ceramics. "They are
not mechanistic," he said. "It is a combination of rigorous potting and casual
finish that gives them this accidental beauty."

Mr. Zetterquist's show makes clear that Vietnamese potters were not the country
cousins of the Chinese. Even plates with folk-art images are original
conceptions made with great skill. One example has a puzzling figure at its
center: a four-legged creature, shakily drawn as if by a child.

"The eyelashes are goofy and the front legs are shriveled," Mr. Zetterquist
said. "But the ears are too small for a donkey. It's a horse."

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A wine pot, far left, with birds and flowers; a fish plate,
left, and a 16th-century parrot-shaped jug are among 34 works on display in
"Vietnamese Ceramics" at the Eric J. Zetterquist gallery in Manhattan.
(Photographs by Eric J. Zetterquist)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Force Takes Up Duties in Haiti

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 14;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1217 words

DATELINE: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti, April 1


The United Nations began its first full day of formal peacekeeping here today,
with nearly 6,900 soldiers and police officers from more than 30 countries
donning blue berets and moving in to replace the American-led military force
that has been responsible for Haiti's security since last fall.

The mood in the capital was calm as the troops took up their mandate, which is
to maintain order as this poor and volatile nation struggles to build a
democracy and a functioning economy.

Though United Nations troops have been pouring into Haiti for more than a month,
they took up their duties only after a formal transfer of authority on Friday
attended by President Clinton, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and the United
Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

The peacekeepers are expected to remain in Haiti for the next 10 months, with
their mission culminating in the inauguration of Mr. Aristide's successor in
February 1996. Throughout this period, they will be exercising a broader set of
responsibilities than the American force they replaced.

"What we will be doing is looking at what Haiti is doing to make all the various
components, such as justice, police and elections, come together," said Lakhdar
Brahimi, a former Algerian Foreign Minister who directs the United Nations
mission here.

"Also, we will also be taking a very active interest in the economy, although
that is not strictly part of our mandate," he said. After years of corruption,
mismanagement and tough international sanctions, Haiti's economy is in a
shambles, and more than half the population is unemployed.

Before its departure, the United Nations mission here must also oversee two sets
of campaigns and elections, parliamentary and presidential, that diplomats say
have the potential to deteriorate into violence.

In contrast to the American-led force, the United Nations plans to deploy some
of its units permanently in the Haitian countryside, home to 70 percent of the
population and still the scene of considerable political tension. That promises
to give the peacekeepers more mobility and flexibility than their predecessors
and is intended to compensate for the smaller size of the United Nations
contingent. At its peak, the American-led mission numbered some 20,000 troops.

In the meantime Haiti will be training a new, permanent police force to replace
the disbanded armed forces, whose former leaders forced Mr. Aristide into exile
for three years beginning in a coup in September 1991.

The United Nations mission's military component is led by Maj. Gen. Joseph W.
Kinzer, who is keenly aware that, as he put it this week in an interview, he is
"the first American general officer ever to command a United Nations force."

A former chief of Army operations at the Pentagon, General Kinzer, 55, has
previously served abroad in the Dominican Republic, Vietnam and Panama, where he
took part in the 1989 American invasion.

About 2,400 of the 6,000 soldiers under General Kinzer's command are from the
United States, mostly from the 25th Infantry Division. Pakistan and Bangladesh
provide the two next largest contingents, at about 850 troops each, followed by
Canada, Nepal and a contingent representing a group of Caribbean nations.

United Nations officials said that nearly three-quarters of the new peacekeeping
force consists of troops who took part in the initial, American-led phase of
operations here. That American force was largely concentrated in Port-au-Prince
and Cap-Haitien, the country's two largest cities, with ongoing operations in
rural and provincial areas largely entrusted to small Special Forces
contingents.

Though the United Nations force is smaller, "I'm not going to be doing anything
less than what the multinational force was doing," General Kinzer said. He
added, "It's how I employ the force and mix and match the force that I think
will maintain the same kind of presence."

General Kinzer said he would be operating with considerably less air support
than the American force, which could be a significant factor once the rainy
season begins next month and makes movement on Haiti's primitive and dilapidated
road system even more difficult than usual.

He has been given three naval landing craft, and he said he planned to do "a
great part of the logistics by sea," as Haitians have done for generations.

There is widespread concern among Haitians that remnants of the paramilitary
groups that acted as enforcers for the old military dictatorship will be tempted
to test the readiness and fighting ability of the new force.

General Kinzer declined to offer details of how his troops would respond to such
a challenge, other than to say their training had prepared them to respond to
any threat.

But he also acknowledged that his forces were operating under somewhat more
restrictive rules of engagement than those followed by the American-led force
that landed here in September. Those troops were empowered by the United Nations
Security Council to take "all necessary means" to impose order in Haiti. The new
rules of engagement do not offer the same latitude in maintaining a "safe and
stable environment," as the United Nations describes its mission here.

"The only difference is that I am not authorized to take unilateral offensive
action," General Kinzer said. "But I believe that I've got sufficient
flexibility in the rules of engagement that if a situation arises, I've got a
full range of options." He said that included the use of deadly force.

In an interview this week, President Aristide expressed some concern that the
United Nations peacekeepers would be purely a "reaction" force "in case some
people want to disturb the climate."

"I am not in a position to say I am worried, but clearly I will have to pay
attention," the Haitian leader said.

Violent crime has surged over the last month. Dealing with that issue will be
the responsibility of the United Nations civilian police, which is commanded by
an officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Neil Pouliot, and replaces the
international police monitors who have been here since last fall.

The mission's plan calls for the United Nations police to patrol the streets of
Haitian cities and towns and to work with the new Haitian police as its trainees
emerge from the police academy here. "In many respects, their job is going to be
even tougher than that of the soldiers, because the biggest vacuum is in law
enforcement, and Haitians are tired of crime," a diplomat here said.

Haitian Government officials and foreign diplomats also said they were
particularly worried about security for the coming elections. In the past,
Haitian elections have routinely been marred not only by ballot stuffing and
other forms of fraud, but by violent attacks on candidates and voters.

With the first round of parliamentary elections scheduled for June 4, political
tensions are already high, especially in the countryside. Some Haitian political
leaders are calling for the United Nations force to guarantee the security of
all candidates and voting booths, but United Nations officials say that is not a
practical course.

"I don't have enough soldiers to do that," General Kinzer said. "There are
potentially 9,000 polling places, and I have 6,000 soldiers."


LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Close to 6,900 troops and police officers under United Nations
authority had their first full day of security duties in Haiti yesterday,
replacing the American military. In Port-au-Prince, Master Sgt. Steve Moran of
the U.S. Army, in a blue beret, monitored Haitians seeking jobs with the U.N.
force. (Associated Press)

Chart: "A CLOSER LOOK: Mission in Haiti: The New Force" provides a list of
countries participating in the United Nations Mission in Haiti, which formally
assumed authority over security from an American-led force on Friday. The
peacekeeping force consists of about 6,000 troops and military personnel and 900
civilian police. (Source: United Nations)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 970 words



International A2-9

DISCONTENT IN EGYPT

President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt facing accusations of human rights abuses,
governmental corruption and mismanagement that are driving away investors.  A2

BOMB KILLS 8 IN GAZA

At least eight people were killed when a bomb blew up in a Gaza City
neighborhood that is reputed to be a stronghold of Hamas, the militant
Palestinian group.  A2

RWANDANS END FLIGHT

Tens of thousands of Rwandans fleeing camps in Burundi halted their flight after
their leaders became convinced that Tanzania would not open its borders.  A3

In Kenya, a crackdown on opposition and the press.  A3

FIRST LADY IN NEPAL

For Hillary Rodham Clinton, in Nepal on her five-nation Asia tour, a
media-pleasing elephant ride and a meeting with Sir Edmund Hillary, her
namesake.  A6

NEW STEP FOR THE U.N.

The United Nations has been breaking tradition to help Asian governments'
efforts to push tens of thousands of migrants back to Vietnam by the end of the
year.  A6

A SCHOOL AND A SCANDAL

To its supporters, the School of the Americas teaches professionalism to Latin
American soldiers; to its most severe critics, it is an academy of assassins.
A8

FEARS IN HAITI

Despite the new United Nations mission of establishing a "safe and stable
environment" in Haiti, there is growing nervousness among the population about
the future.  A8

SHARING DATA WITH RUSSIA

The Clinton Administration has offered American intelligence on Iran to Russian
officials in hopes of persuading them to drop plans to build nuclear reactors in
Iran.  A9

In Dublin, a landmark on the road to peace in Northern Ireland.  A7

Paris Journal: Notre Dame out of harmony with computer age.  A4

National A12-17, B6-8

TAX-CUT QUANDARY

The Republican majority in the House is expected to pass a deep tax-cut proposal
this week despite misgivings about public opinion and the possibility of making
the Federal the deficit expand.  A1

GAYS IN THE MILITARY

House Speaker Newt Gingrich promises to try to overturn the Government's new
policy on homosexuals in the military although the Joint Chiefs of Staff are
happy with the current rules.  A1

LIFE AND DEATH: WHO DECIDES?

The question of whether doctors or family members are to decide when
brain-damaged patients should get continued medical treatment will be examined
in a lawsuit against Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston and its doctors.
A1

SEAGRAM DEAL IS NEAR

The Seagram Company is close to a deal to sell its 25 percent stake in Du Pont
back to the company for nearly $10 billion in cash, people familiar with the
negotiations said last night.  A1

TRYING TO CURB LAWSUITS

A Republican package of bills aiming at revamping the nation's civil court
system easily passed the House, but its fate is far from certain in the Senate.
B6

PREPARED FOR BATTLE -- OR NOT

The Pentagon is spending less on new weapons and equipment than at any time in
nearly 50 years, and some are afraid combat readiness is in jeopardy.  B7

A STATE WITH ITS OWN MIND

Rhode Island, bucking a national trend, seems likely to adopt a law that would
increase the state's protection to homosexuals against bias in housing,
employment, public accommodations and credit.  A12

DIM HOPES FOR DEMOCRATS

Many leading Democrats have all but given up hope of regaining control of the
Senate in 1996 and are focusing on persuading wavering House members to run
again.  B6

A DOCTOR WITH A HEART

In Bayou La Batre, a poor fishing village on the Gulf Coast in Alabama, the
people have an angel: a country doctor who makes house calls and works on
credit.  A12

ROMANCE IN THE AIR

Fiction came to life at a convention of readers of romance novels. The readers
got a chance to meet the men who model for the pirates, firemen and others on
the covers of the books they devour.  A12

Strikes have halted most public transit in Philadelphia.  A17

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-19

Finding a mission in Handel's operas.  C13

Theater: Critic's Notebook C13

"The Only Thing Worse You Could Have Told Me . . ." C16

"Watbanaland." C16

Music: Graham Parker.  C16

The Schubertiade evolves.  C18

Dance: An Ailey ensemble honors its leader.  C13

Books: An intimate of F.D.R.  C17

Sports C1-11

BASEBALL OWNERS QUIT FIGHT

Major League Baseball owners yesterday accepted the players' offer to return to
work, ending the longest work stoppage in professional sports history.  A1

REPLACEMENTS NOW REPLACEABLE

As baseball's real players edged closer to returning, the game's replacement
players edged back toward anonymity.  A1

A PERFECT UCONN SEASON

The Connecticut women's basketball team completed its undefeated season by
stopping Tennessee, 70-64, in the final of the National Collegiate Athletic
Association tournament.  A1

Baseball: Fans not happy.  C2

Yanks ahead of most teams.  C4

Basketball: Knicks top Nets.  C9

Columns: Anderson on baseball.  C1

Berkow on UConn women.  C1

Rhoden on N.C.A.A.  C6

On Baseball.  C3

Hockey: Rangers lose again.  C8

N.C.A.A.: 2 paths to final.  C1

Obituaries B10 Stanley A. Cain, a pioneering conservationist who helped develop
ecological science.

Dame Lucie Rie, a ceramicist.

Oliver Rea, a theatrical producer.

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19 Editorials

The baseball truce.

Mischief on Mexico.

Buffs.

Tuberculosis resurgent.

Letters

William Safire: Newt's 100th.

Anthony Lewis: Never again.

Philip K. Howard: Put the judges back in justice.

Chronicle B4

Bridge C18

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Throngs of Boat People to Be Sent Home to Vietnam Soon

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, March 30


Governments throughout Southeast Asia are to begin sending Vietnamese boat
people home within weeks, with the United Nations breaking tradition to help in
the effort to push tens of thousands of the migrants back to Vietnam by the end
of the year, diplomats and United Nations officials say.

Alarmed by violence this month among Vietnamese detained in Hong Kong and the
Philippines, governments across the region are beefing up the police presence in
the detention camps, where most of the 46,000 boat people are expected to face
eviction by the end of the year.

In protest this week, a group of boat people set fires in a Hong Kong camp and a
group of asylum-seekers in the Philippines threatened suicide again. Several
slashed themselves with knives this month when they were forced to move from one
camp in the Philippines to another.

The first large wave is expected to take place in April or May, with the program
reaching its full monthly quota of 3,600 by midsummer, said Werner Blatter,
director of the Asia division for the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

"We will soon see some important movements of people," Mr. Blatter said in an
interview. "We feel sure that it is now time for these people to go home. It's
time to wrap this up."

He said the goal was to empty virtually all of the detention camps in Asia,
except those in Hong Kong, by the end of the year. In Hong Kong, where about
25,000 boat people are detained, officials said they might not complete the
repatriations until the middle of next year.

Although United Nations employees will be not be personally involved in forcing
the Vietnamese onto airplanes or boats, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees has agreed to cooperate with the repatriation program.
The move is a sharp break for the United Nations, which in the past has refused
to involve itself in programs to force refugees or economic migrants to move
against their will.

"From a public relations standpoint, there's some queasiness within the United
Nations about taking part in something like this," said a Western diplomat
involved in the program. "But I think the U.N. people are comforted to know that
the international community is behind them."

The United States, which long opposed sending the Vietnamese home and has
provided hundreds of millions of dollars since the end of the Vietnam War for
the upkeep of the camps, is now eager to see the last of the boat people return
to Vietnam -- voluntarily or not.

In a statement intended to dash any lingering hope among the boat people that
they might find a home in the United States, the State Department said on March
17 that the Vietnamese "whose claims to asylum have not been upheld have no
option but to return to their country of origin."

Vietnam is also eager to see the migrants back home, if only to put an end to
its image as a country so poor and so repressive that people would rather take
to rickety boats on the high seas than remain in their homeland. The return of
the last boat people will signal the end of a 20-year exodus that led more than
a million Vietnamese to a new life abroad, most in the United States.

Virtually all of the Vietnamese left in detention camps in Southeast Asia -- the
largest camps are in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and
Thailand -- have been labeled economic migrants, not political refugees.

Ruth Marshall, a spokeswoman in Geneva for the High Commissioner for Refugees,
described the situation of the Vietnamese left in the camps as "a nonrefugee
problem."

"There is no moral or legal principle that requires the international community
to continue to assist a large population of illegal immigrants," she added.

She said the High Commissioner's Office was eager to close the Asian camps
because of far more pressing needs elsewhere, particularly in parts of Africa
where civil war and ethnic strife have displaced millions of people in just the
last year.

"There are real refugees out there crying out for a lot more help than we can
given them right now," she said. "We have to draw a line."

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY;
The Man Who Would Save NY for NYNEX

BYLINE: By MARK LANDLER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1762 words


Ivan G. Seidenberg still regularly drops in on his pals at the old New York
Telephone garage on Bronx River Avenue, where he started in 1966 as a
cable-splicer's helper, fresh out of Evander Childs High School. Now that he's
head of the whole company, Nynex, such visits could easily seem like the
calculated effort of a chief executive to bond with his troops.

But the linesmen and splicers who go out for coffee with Mr. Seidenberg -- some
of whom started out with him in '66 -- insist he's the genuine article: the
first born-and-bred New Yorker to run Nynex and the man who will lead the
company's defense of its hometown franchise.

After years of steady encroachment by others, Nynex suddenly faces a flood of
telecom competitors, all of whom are angling for the banks, brokerage houses and
now even the residents of New York City.

"We're like a car stranded on the Cross Bronx Expressway," said the 48-year-old
Mr. Seidenberg, who became Nynex's chief executive in January and takes over as
chairman today. "Every time we stop for a minute, somebody takes off another
hubcap."

To be sure, all seven of the Baby Bells are grappling with the risks and
potential rewards of competition, no longer merely for local phone service but
soon for cable television programming and eventually for long-distance calls and
wireless communications.

But nowhere is the struggle fiercer, the hurdles higher, or the stakes greater
than in New York City, the world's single largest local telecommunications
market and one that last year accounted for more than one-quarter of Nynex's
$13.3 billion in revenue.

Certainly, no other Bell chairman faces the task that awaits the compact and
driven Mr. Seidenberg, a decorated Vietnam veteran who may soon be fighting a
block-by-block battle for his company's very survival as an independent company.
Some analysts even suggest that Nynex might eventually be acquired by one of its
nimbler Bell siblings.

"Ivan is very tough-minded," said Mark Fowler, a former chairman of the Federal
Communications Commission, who negotiated regulatory issues with Mr. Seidenberg
in the 1980's when he worked in Nynex's Washington office. "But I don't think
it's clear that he's going to succeed."

An Ongoing Battle For the Best Market

Nynex, which provides service throughout much of New York State and New England,
has had to fight for its best New York City customers since its creation in the
1984 breakup of AT&T's Bell System. In Manhattan alone, the company estimates
that it has less than 50 percent of the "special access" market -- the business
of routing long-distance calls to and from local phone lines -- in the bustling
commercial expanse from 59th Street to Wall Street.

Most of that business has been skimmed off by two companies, MFS Communications
and the Teleport Communications Group, which is owned by the cable operators Cox
Enterprises and Tele-Communications Inc. Because they are not bound by Nynex's
regulated pricing structure, they can cherry-pick corporate customers from
midtown office towers, without shouldering Nynex's obligation to provide
affordable phone service to low-income neighborhoods.

But now, as Nynex nears an agreement with the New York Public Service Commission
for greater regulatory freedom in return for fuller competition, a horde of new
invaders are building staging areas in and around the city. The most formidable
include the long-distance company MCI Communications, which is spending $2
billion to install networks for local phone service in 11 cities, including New
York.

Meanwhile, Cablevision Systems, which provides cable television to 320,000
subscribers in New York City, hopes to offer local phone service in the
metropolitan area sometime next year.

And Nynex's archest rival for the eyes, ears, and voices of New York could be
Time Warner, whose cable systems already serve a million New Yorkers. Time
Warner plans to offer long-distance access service to business customers later
this year and eventually enter the residential phone business.

The trouble is, Nynex remains wholly unsuited for such a challenge. Its costs
are bloated, it has a history of slow-footed management and until recently it
has labored under some of the most onerous regulations in the country.

"If you weigh 300 pounds, it's hard to run a marathon," Mr. Seidenberg said. "So
you have to get into shape."

To that end, Mr. Seidenberg has embarked on an ambitious and risky corporate
overhaul. Some of his moves -- like shifting the headquarters from suburban
White Plains to a skyscraper in midtown Manhattan -- are largely symbolic.
Others -- like slashing nearly 17,000 people from a payroll that had topped
95,000 -- are brutally concrete.

Trying to Reclaim Financial District

And Mr. Seidenberg is intent on reclaiming New York's financial district with
more deals like the one the company landed last fall: a $5 million to $10
million contract from Citicorp to build a fiber optic communications network
connecting the bank's offices in Manhattan, Queens, and Parsippany, N.J.

Because Nynex cannot yet legally offer phone service in New Jersey, the company
joined with its rival, MFS Communications, to bid for the contract. "We were
very pleasantly surprised by their flexibility," said Colin Crook, the senior
technology officer at Citicorp.

In early May, New York State is expected to adopt a sweeping plan, championed by
Mr. Seidenberg, that would unshackle Nynex from rate-of-return pricing
regulation. In rate-of-return pricing, regulators set a phone company's prices
based on how much it costs to provide service. Then the regulators and the
company negotiate a percentage of profit above costs -- the rate of return.

Given such a cumbersome process, analysts said it was small wonder that Nynex
had not become more efficient by lowering its costs.

But with freedom comes risk. In return for the ability to earn unlimited
profits, Nynex must submit to deep cuts in its residential and business phone
rates -- a total of $375 million in New York State by 1999. Unless Mr.
Seidenberg can slash costs, profits could vanish.

"We haven't produced the results I would have wanted in the last five years,"
Mr. Seidenberg said. "And I'm very disappointed by that."

And Don't Forget Residential Areas

Mr. Seidenberg is under fire to improve Nynex's service to residential customers
throughout the five boroughs. A recent staff report by the New York State Public
Service Commission harshly criticized the company's service record. In New York
City last year, Nynex's customers had 99,145 service outages in the fourth
quarter alone, while repair teams missed 61,500 appointments.

Unless the company can demonstrate measurable improvements in customer service,
the state has reserved the right to renegotiate Nynex's flexible-rates plan
after five years.

"It's an enormous leap of faith to believe that by freeing up the company, it
will devote the necessary resources to improving its service," said Robert
Ceisler, executive director of the Citizens Utility Board.

In its defense, Nynex likes to point out that its legal obligation to provide
universal service means supplying phone lines to unprofitable customers. Still,
Mr. Seidenberg acknowledged that Nynex needs to pull up its socks, particularly
in neighborhoods like East Brooklyn.

Part of the problem there, he said, is that new immigrants are crowding into
apartment houses, pushing the occupancy from 3 to 10 or more families. That puts
a strain on local networks not designed to handle so many customers.

But Mr. Seidenberg quickly added, "I come from a tough neighborhood, where if
you make excuses, you get punched in the nose."

Seidenberg's Rise Through the Ranks

How did Ivan Seidenberg become the man whose job it is to slay all these
dragons?

Unlike his predecessor, William C. Ferguson, who is retiring at age 64, or the
chiefs of most of the other Baby Bells, Mr. Seidenberg is neither a Midwesterner
nor a veteran of telephone operations.

Mr. Seidenberg grew up in the Gun Hill section of the Bronx. He had worked as a
New York Telephone splicer's helper for only a year before leaving for Vietnam,
where he served in the Army infantry and was wounded at Khe Sahn.

When he returned from the war, Mr. Seidenberg rose steadily in the company,
mostly in jobs outside the core telephone division, and attended night school
for 16 years to earn a bachelor's degree in mathematics from City College and an
M.B.A. from Pace University.

Shortly after the AT&T breakup in 1984, Nynex put him in charge of its new
Washington regulatory office, where he earned a reputation as a shrewd
negotiator and stood out from the rest of the Bell crowd by sporting a glossy
black beard. Later, Mr. Seidenberg oversaw Nynex's short-lived foray into
computer retailing and directed the company's overseas and cellular operations.

With this resume, it took even some of his friends by surprise when he was named
chief executive over such old telephone hands as Frederic V. Salerno, who is now
the vice chairman.

And yet Mr. Seidenberg, who has kept in touch with his rank-and-file roots, has
been intimately involved with one of Nynex's toughest phone-company matters.
Early in 1994 the company announced plans to lay off 16,800 employees, or 22
percent of its work force. After Nynex's powerful unions protested, Mr.
Seidenberg led the effort to placate them.

Negotiating a new contract a full year before the old one expired, he agreed to
offer fairly generous buyouts for employees. The deal resulted in a $1.3 billion
charge against earnings. But Mr. Seidenberg said labor peace was worth its cost.

"You never, ever get comfortable with impacting people's lives," he said. And he
pointed out that the future of Nynex, particularly in its hometown, depends on
how promptly repair teams show up to install telephones on Wall Street -- or
Bronx River Avenue.

That sentiment means a lot at the phone company garage in the Bronx, where Joe
McAleer worked alongside Mr. Seidenberg in 1966 and is a union official there,
glad to have a cup of coffee when the top boss drops by. "He hasn't changed a
whole lot," Mr. McAleer said.

Well, maybe superficial changes.

"Does he still have that damn beard?" asked Mr. Fowler, the former F.C.C.
chairman, in a telephone interview from Florida.

Told that Mr. Seidenberg had shaved it off a few years ago, as he was being
groomed for the executive suite and the fight for Nynex's survival, Mr. Fowler
replied: "Good. Just in time."

NAME: Ivan G. Seidenberg

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ivan G. Seidenberg has worked his way up from cable-splicer's
helper to become the chairman of Nynex. (pg. D1); Ivan G. Seidenberg is trying
to keep the hubcaps on the Nynex bus. (pg. D6) (Angel Franco/The New York Times)

; Chart: "The key competitors"

1. MFS COMMUNICATIONS: Provides long-distance access to 2,000 businesses in the
New York area. Has wired 170 buildings with fiber-optic cable in Manhattan.

2. TELEPORT: Has 600 business customers in New York. Plans to offer residential
communications services through an alliance with Sprint and cable-television
operators.

The main new rivals

3. TIME WARNER: Plans to begin access service for business customers later this
year, and hopes to offer residential service in 1996. Building a 22-mile
fiber-optic ring in Manhattan.

4. CABLEVISION SYSTEMS: Recently signed a network conneciton agreement with
Nynex to offer a combination of phone and cable service in New York City. Will
begin testing service this summer.

5. MCI: Spendgin $500 million over the next year to build and operate networks
for local phone service in 11 cities, including New York.

Graphs: "How Nynex Stacks Up" shows Nynex's dollars per line in 1993, total
operating eexpenses per phone line for Jan. through Sept. 1993, and percentage
of consumers who said they were satisfied with their phone service in 1993.
(Sources: Company Reports; Salomon Brothers; Coyle Research; Federal
Communications Commission) (pg. D6)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Justice Back State Tax on Interstate Fares

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 3


Brushing aside a decades-old precedent, the Supreme Court ruled today that a
state may tax the full value of tickets sold for interstate transportation, as
long as the trip originates within the state.

The 7-to-2 decision, in a case from Oklahoma, applied to tickets for interstate
bus travel. While the full implications of the ruling are unclear, the theory
the Court endorsed also appeared to authorize states to impose sales taxes on
interstate rail and airline travel -- to the extent that Federal law and
regulations permit.

Such taxes, the burden of which would be borne by passengers rather than by
transportation companies, could theoretically be a significant new source of
revenue for the states.

"States are hungry for revenue" and are watching legal developments closely,
said Roxanne Davis, a lawyer for the Federation of Tax Administrators, which
represents state tax authorities. Still, she said that the full implications of
the decision remained uncertain.

"The Court is moving as cautiously as it can in a fairly new area," Ms. Davis
said, noting that it was only fairly recently that states began applying their
sales taxes to services in addition to tangible goods. For states considering
such taxes on interstate travel, she added, there may be a difference between
what is constitutionally permissible and politically feasible.

Oklahoma is the only state to subject interstate transportation to its sales
tax, a step other states have avoided apparently because they regarded the
practice as unconstitutional under a 1948 Supreme Court ruling in a New York
case. The Court did not overrule that earlier decision today, finding instead
that it did not apply because of differences in the way the two states applied
taxes on bus travel.

The New York tax that the Court declared unconstitutional in 1948 was a tax on
bus companies' gross receipts, making it in effect an income tax, Justice David
H. Souter said in the majority opinion today.

Justice Souter said the flaw in the old New York tax was its potential for
multiple taxation: if each state taxed the income of interstate transportation
companies, without regard to the number of miles actually traveled within the
state, the companies would be liable for multiple taxes on each transaction, to
the detriment of interstate commerce.

By contrast, Justice Souter said that the Oklahoma ticket tax, 4.5 percent at
the point of sale, was basically a "garden variety" sales tax. The Court has
long regarded such taxes as presenting no problem under the commerce clause of
the Constitution, even for goods that typically move across state lines.

Because a ticket is sold only once, there is no chance of multiple taxation,
Justice Souter said. "The tax falls on the buyer of the services, who is no more
subject to double taxation on the sale of these services than the buyer of goods
would be," he wrote.

The decision, Oklahoma Tax Commission v. Jefferson Lines Inc., No. 93-1677,
overturned a 1994 ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth
Circuit, in St. Louis. That court, agreeing with a 1992 ruling by the Federal
District Court in Minneapolis, held that Oklahoma's application of its sales tax
to the full value of interstate travel originating in Oklahoma was an
unconstitutional burden on interstate commerce.

The state tax was challenged in Federal bankruptcy proceedings by a
Minnesota-based bus company, Jefferson Lines. The bus line is opposing the
Oklahoma Tax Commission's effort to collect $47,000 in sales tax that Jefferson
had failed to collect from passengers who bought bus tickets in Oklahoma for
interstate trips originating there.

Greyhound Lines Inc., which was presented by Oklahoma with a $900,000 tax
assessment during its bankruptcy reorganization in the early 1990's, has also
challenged the tax in Federal court.

Justice Souter's opinion today was joined by four other Justices: Chief Justice
William H. Rehnquist and Justices John Paul Stevens, Anthony M. Kennedy and Ruth
Bader Ginsburg. Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas concurred
separately, agreeing with the result but not with the majority's analysis of the
Constitution's commerce clause.

Justice Stephen G. Breyer dissented in an opinion that Justice Sandra Day
O'Connor joined. They said that the Court's 1948 precedent in the New York case,
Central Greyhound Lines v. Mealey, required that the Oklahoma tax be found
unconstitutional because the two taxes were "for all relevant purposes,
identical." Interstate travel was "the very essence of interstate commerce," the
dissenting Justices said.

The decision raised but did not resolve some important issues about state
taxation of interstate services, said Amy Eisenstadt, director of state and
local tax research in the Washington office of the KPMG Peat Marwick accounting
firm.

Ms. Eisenstadt said that while a ticket sale is an event that occurs at a
particular location, "for a lot of services, it is not always clear where the
transaction did in fact take place." She gave as an example architectural
services for which a contract was reached in one location but the work was
performed in another.



Agent Orange Case

The Court agreed to decide whether the Government is legally obliged to
reimburse two chemical manufacturers for their contributions to a $180 million
settlement for veterans who were exposed to Agent Orange during the Vietnam War.

Agent Orange, a chemical defoliant, contained a toxic byproduct, dioxin, that
veterans have blamed for serious health problems. The veterans' lawsuit against
the manufacturers was settled in 1984.

Two of the companies, Hercules Inc., which is liable for $18.8 million under the
settlement, and the William T. Thompson Company, with a $3.1 million liability,
sued the Government in 1990 on the ground that they should be shielded as
Government contractors for any adverse consequences of filling a contract to
Government specifications.

Thompson, which is no longer in business, additionally argued that the
Government should indemnify it under the Defense Production Act, a 1950 law
under which the Government had required its contractors to make Agent Orange.

The companies' arguments were rejected last year by the United States Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit on the ground that their decision to enter into
the settlement with the veterans was voluntary. The companies' appeal is
Hercules v. U.S., No. 94-818.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Eisenhower Park to Get Veterans Monument

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A donation drive has been announced by the Nassau County
Executive for a three-part wall in Eisenhower Park in East Meadow honoring
veterans of the Korean and Vietnam Wars, prisoners of war and the missing in
action. Bill Rose, left, and Pat Montilli, both veterans, looked over artist's
renderings. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 811 words



International A3-13

MOVES AGAINST MIDEAST FOES
President Clinton said that Iraq could be regaining the ability to develop
weapons of mass destruction while national security advisers considered a
near-total trade ban against Iran.  A1

The Purple Heart will be awarded to 14 killed over Iraq.  A12


ARGENTINA'S PAINFUL PAST
Argentina is engulfed in a wrenching debate over how to come to terms with the
1976-1983 dirty war, in which 4,000 people were killed and 10,000 vanished.  A1

FIXING THE SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP
President Clinton and Prime Minister John Major emerged from meetings declaring
that the United States and Britain have largely patched up their differences.
A3

C.I.A.'s SHADOWIEST SIDE
The Central Intelligence Agency's relationships with foreign intelligence
services have always been among the least-known aspects of the agency's work.
A6

SOUTH CHINA SEA DISPUTES
China and its Southeast Asian neighbors say they are eager to avoid a military
clash over the Spratley Islands, but recent actions suggest otherwise.  A11

Heavy fighting broke out in northeast Bosnia.  A3

Pakistan's heroin addicts can expect little by way of help.  A12

Vietnam marks the 20th anniversary of Communist victories.  A13

Rupite Journal: A Bulgarian psychic gets a shrine of her own.  A4

National A16-23, B8

A MILITARY MODEL
President Clinton and others say the military is a model of how to assist
minorities and women a without generating resentment among white males.  A1

HARASSMENT IN ACADEMIES
A Congressional study says women at the military service academies are being
sexually harassed at the same or even higher rates than they were three years
ago. B8

ERRORS LEADING TO FATAL CRASH
A series of errors, beginning in the control tower and ending in the cockpit,
caused a USAir crash in Charlotte, N.C., last July that killed 37 people,
officials said.  A1

WELFARE, AND SHELBY COUNTY
The outcome of the Washington debate over welfare will be deeply felt in Shelby
County, Ky., where 6 percent of the people receive Federal food stamps.  A1

VERDICT IN WHITE HOUSE SHOOTING
A Federal jury convicted a Colorado man of trying to assassinate the President
by firing an assault rifle at the White House last fall.  A16

CHALLENGING THE EVIDENCE
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson began an effort to pick apart the way the police
gathered and handled the evidence for his murder trial.  A19

VOTE SET ON TAX PACKAGE
Believing they have the necessary support, House leaders will bring their
package of tax breaks to the floor for a final vote today.  A22

GINGRICH ON GAY POLICY
Speaker Newt Gingrich edged back from comments that he wanted to overturn the
President's policy on homosexuals in the military.  A22

Education B9

Amid debates over standards, a look at how history is taught. B1

Metro Digest B1

STATE TO EASE HEALTH CARE RULES
Governor Pataki announced that he would roll back or eliminate 16 health-care
regulations intended to insure that the state adequately oversees the industry.
A1

COURT RULES AGAINST JEFFRIES
Reversing its decision of a year ago, a Federal appeals court ruled that City
College acted within its rights in removing Prof. Leonard Jeffries as chairman
of the Black Studies Department for making incendiary remarks about Jews. A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C19-24

Glenn Close and Andrew Lloyd Webber try to calm things.  C19
Joseph Papp Public Theater names a co-administrator.  C20
Theater: "Luck, Pluck and Virtue." C19
Film: "Metal and Melancholy." C23
Music: "The Ghosts of Versailles." C19
Concertgebouw Orchestra.  C21
Dicapo's "Susannah." C24
Dance: Thelma Hill Project.  C20
Books: "How the Irish Saved Civilization," by Thomas Cahill.  C23
Book Notes C24
Television: "Animated Women: Faith Hubley." C24

The Living Section C1-16

At work with Ivana Trump.  C1
Fashion C16

Health Page C17

New ways to count pollen may help sufferers.

Sports B10-16

Baseball: Mets woo John Franco.  B11
Basketball: Knicks lose to the Pacers.  B11
U.C.L.A.'s Ed O'Bannon led the way.  B12
Columns: Rhoden on college basketball B11
Golf: The mysteries of Augusta's front nine.  B16
Hockey: What's wrong with the Rangers?.  B11

Obituaries B22

Hannes Alfven, a Nobel laureate in physics and founder in the field.
Katherine Squire, actress.

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

The secrecy infection.
The bias against women's sports.
Cheating a charity, unchallenged.

Letters

Bob Herbert: The wrong target.
Thomas L. Friedman: Mischief makers.
Stephen Moore: How to slash corporate welfare.

Chronicle B2

Crossword C24

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Spectrum Of Veterans Look Back In Vietnam

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: DA NANG, Vietnam, March 30


An American veteran stood in the city square of Da Nang the other day and said
he was curious about all the fuss.

Red-and-yellow banners hanging across the streets proclaimed: "Remember the
Soldiers Who Devoted Their Lives to the Struggle." Some participants wearing
olive drab fatigues and leaves and branches as camouflage re-enacted a march
down the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

The enthusiasm was for an anniversary of a date unfamiliar to the American:
March 29, 1975. American troops had left Vietnam two years earlier, but that is
the date when Da Nang fell to invading Communist forces marching toward Saigon,
now called Ho Chi Minh City, which fell a month later.

"I kind of like it, actually," said the former Army lieutenant, Ty Dodge of
Birmingham, Ala. "I know they are celebrating the war we lost, but I am
patriotic, so I appreciate all the fervor."

Vietnam is staging celebrations that will continue through April to commemorate
the conclusion to the long war in which an estimated 1.5 million Vietnamese and
more than 58,000 Americans died.

In Da Nang, years of brutal warfare in central Vietnam came to a close with
barely a bullet fired. The South Vietnamese officers fled after they heard that
Hue, to the north, had fallen and that their Government was in chaos.

As the North Vietnamese artillery fired from the surrounding hillsides, soldiers
for the south dumped their guns in the rice paddies and ponds and burned their
uniforms.

"My uniform, my medals, my identification card, my paperwork, I burned it all,"
said 56-year-old Phuc, who like most of the people interviewed spoke on
condition that their full names not be used. His job had been to try to recruit
soldiers, even as his army was crumbling.

The night before Da Nang fell, Phuc simply went home and waited. North
Vietnamese soldiers found him, set up a headquarters in his house, and ordered
him to help them to round up any soldiers still fighting. They did not find any.

"My father wanted us to commit suicide together," said Lan, a 25-year-old cafe
waitress whose father, an officer in the South Vietnamese Army, feared
retribution from the invading forces.

She said that she and her two sisters crowded with her parents onto a raft, held
hands and considered jumping into the water together. "My father said no,
because one of us might survive and their life would be terrible," she said.
They went back home.

As the anniversary of what the Government calls the liberation approached, Phuc,
like thousands of others in Da Nang, found himself in the strange position of
watching preparations for a victory celebration for a war that he lost.

"I will stay at home," he said with a shrug.

Lan said she would stay home too. "What is there to be happy about?" she said.
"Our lives were better before the liberation."

Da Nang, with its large American military installation and proximity to the
demilitarized zone, was filled with divided allegiances. Some people fought for
South Vietnam, but others fought for the Vietcong. Some worked with the
Americans, and some spied on the Americans.

Quang, 60, and Cu, 46, are brothers who fought on opposite sides. Quang went
north after the Vietminh's victory over the French in 1954 and joined the
Communists. Cu fought for South Vietnam.

They saw each other for the first time in more than two decades on the day Da
Nang fell. Quang was with a division invading the city from the north. He
stopped at his family's home and found Cu, who had abandoned his unit when his
commanders disappeared.

"We hugged and we cried," said Quang. "The war was finally over and we could be
brothers again." He said he had not known whether his brother had been a soldier
for the south, "but I suspected he might be."

But he said that does not matter now, adding, "If Vietnam and America can be
friendly again, then why not two brothers?"


LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vietnam shows the location of Da Nang.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Rival Claims to Island Chain Bring Edginess to Asia's Rim

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 605 words

DATELINE: MANILA, April 4


China and its Southeast Asian neighbors say they are eager to avoid a military
clash over a chain of potentially oil-rich islands in the South China Sea, but
their recent actions suggest that they may be girding for a fight.

The dispute over the Spratly Islands grew more serious last week when the
Philippines announced that it had torn down or blown up Chinese territorial
markers on several of the islands and seized four Chinese trawlers. Vietnam
accused Taiwan of firing on Vietnamese transport ships that came near the
largest of the Spratlys.

Six nations -- China, the Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, Malaysia and Brunei --
claim all or part of the Spratlys, a chain of hundreds of islands reefs, atolls
and sandbanks across 40,000 square miles of the South China Sea. All but Brunei
have put garrisons on islands they claim.

Diplomats have been haggling for years over the sovereignty of the islands,
which are valuable not only because of the possibility of large oil reserves but
also because they are scattered across vital sea lanes.

American and Philippine officials say the United States, concerned over the
growing tensions in the South China Sea and the possibility of a military clash,
agreed on Monday to raise the issue with Beijing in hopes of a peaceful
settlement of sovereignty claims for the Spratlys.

While American diplomats here would not comment publicly on the issue, the
Philippine Foreign Minister, Roberto Romulo, said Monday that he had been told
by senior American officials that the United States "views these developments
with a great deal of concern."

The Chinese threat to the Spratlys was contained for decades by the presence of
the United States Navy. But after the Americans left their base in Subic Bay in
the Philippines in 1992, the American security umbrella has mostly disappeared.

Southeast Asian leaders have long worried that China would someday use the
Spratlys as a means to assert control over the entire South China Sea -- turning
it, as Asian diplomats often say, into a "Chinese lake."

Those worries turned into alarm in February, when the Philippines announced that
the Chinese had built a military-style structure atop a reef in the Spratlys
also claimed by the Philippines. The contested land, Mischief Reef, is about 135
miles west of the Philippine island of Palawan.

The Philippines responded by dispatching warships and by destroying Chinese
markers and metal structures built on four nearby shoals.

Manila has turned aside Beijing's demand for the freedom of the 62 Chinese
fishermen who were aboard the five boats seized last month. The Philippines said
investigators had found 80 endangered sea turtles and hundreds of sticks of
dynamite in the holds of the boats.

The Chinese have insisted that the structures on Mischief Reef were intended as
a shelter for Chinese fishing vessels. The assertion was brought into question,
however, when reporters recently flew over the reef and found that the
structures included a satellite dish and other telecommunications gear, and that
the reef was being guarded by at least one Chinese military ship.

The Chinese and the Filipinos are not the only ones willing to use force to
defend their claims to the Spratlys. On Sunday, Vietnam asserted that Taiwanese
troops stationed on Taiping, the largest of the Spratlys, had fired on
Vietnamese transport ships passing nearby.

The Taiwanese Foreign Ministry said it would investigate the incident, but added
in a statement that "it is within the sovereignty right of our Government to
have activities and disperse boats from other countries in the area."

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Secrecy Infection

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


As President Clinton tries to determine how the Central Intelligence Agency
entangled itself in a disgraceful covert relationship with Guatemalan military
thugs, he must reckon with the abuse of secrecy that rests at the core of this
case, and so many other past C.I.A. train wrecks.

Washington has a long, dishonorable history of mistaking secrecy for patriotism
and misusing the cover of national security to shield abuses of power and amoral
policies. The C.I.A. is the most skilled practitioner of these undemocratic
arts, but far from the only one.

Over the years the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Pentagon, the State
Department and the White House itself have invoked the requirements of secrecy
to hide misdeeds. One of Richard Nixon's first gambits to shut down Watergate
investigators was to instruct the C.I.A. to tell the Justice Department the
matter involved national security secrets too sensitive to pursue. Other abuses
of secrecy were C.I.A. plots to assassinate foreign leaders, Federal efforts
during the Vietnam War to suppress domestic political dissent, the covert
bombing of Cambodia and the Iran-contra affair.

The Guatemalan case revolves around secrecy, and the gross miscalculations it
can breed. The C.I.A. maintained a secret relationship with the Guatemalan
military. It secretly paid a Guatemalan colonel to provide information on
security developments in his country. When the agency learned that the colonel
had authorized the 1990 killing of Michael DeVine, an American citizen living in
Guatemala, it kept the news secret from the State Department, which was
investigating the murder. When the Bush Administration suspended open military
assistance to Guatemala to protest the killing, the C.I.A. continued secretly to
provide money. It withheld information on a second killing approved by the
colonel, the 1992 murder of Efrain Bamaca Velasquez, a rebel leader married to
an American, Jennifer Harbury.

There is a place and time for secrecy. Matters diplomatic and military often
need to be protected, and many intelligence activities cannot be conducted in
the open. But instead of maintaining a reasonable use of secrecy, the C.I.A. has
concealed almost all its business from the public and much of it from Congress.
The agency has not differentiated between authentic intelligence secrets, like
efforts to monitor Soviet nuclear forces during the cold war, and expedient
political secrets, like the Guatemalan relationship, that serve only to disguise
questionable activities and thwart accountability.

Anyone who doubts that secrecy is a Washington disease need look no further than
Speaker Newt Gingrich's churlish response to Representative Robert Torricelli's
efforts to expose the Guatemalan affair. Instead of defending Mr. Torricelli for
appreciating the greater national interest served by disclosure, Mr. Gingrich
attacked his colleague for causing "a public embarrassment to the United
States." For a student of American history, Mr. Gingrich shows little
understanding of the central importance to a democratic system of public
accountability of government agencies.

President Clinton has an obligation to determine what happened in Guatemala and
punish those responsible for the C.I.A. misconduct. He must also deliver on his
postponed promise to rewrite the secrecy regulations that strangle the flow of
information and give succor to those who abuse the system. Two years after the
White House began a review, and a year after his aides drafted an executive
order to declassify old information and reduce the number of new secrets, Mr.
Clinton has not taken action.

The President can find a good case for reducing secrecy in the C.I.A.'s own
misguided history in Guatemala. The agency is only now preparing to unseal the
records of the 1954 coup in which it ousted President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman. If
the documents had been disclosed in a more timely fashion, the dangers of
associating with murderous security services there might have been clearer and
the C.I.A. might not have sunk again into the quicksand of Guatemala.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

History on the March;
New Standards, Attacked on the Right, Stress the Neglected

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2948 words


Jaime Kleinman, 16, took another look at the American Revolution and surprised
herself by arguing that the British were right.

"They did everything for the colonists," she said. "They didn't deserve to be
turned on." Many of her classmates at a Long Island high school, however, argued
just as strongly that the British were wrong.

In a Brooklyn high school, a history class examined a drawing of the Boston
Massacre by Paul Revere. "Where's the black man?" one student asked.

Absent, along with the snow that historians say was on the ground that day, was
the Revolution's first American casualty, Crispus Attucks, a former slave. The
class pondered this, along with the use of the word "massacre" for five deaths.

The schools are miles apart geographically and far apart economically. Yet both
share new approaches to teaching American history similar to those recommended
in voluntary standards proposed last fall by a task force at the National Center
for History in the Schools at the University of California at Los Angeles, for
which revisions are now under consideration.

The standards, which have been criticized by conservatives, suggest additions to
course content to include the lives and contributions of Americans who have been
underemphasized in the past. Students might be asked to assess the contributions
of Prince Hall and Absalom Jones, former slaves who helped newly freed slaves in
the 18th century.

Students are encouraged to bring a historical perspective to bear on the
present, through debate and the use of the Socratic method, approaches long used
by some of the best teachers to challenge students. They might be asked to
describe the effects of the Declaration of Independence and the French
Declaration of the Rights of Man on 20th-century revolutions in Mexico, Russia,
China, Cuba and Vietnam.

Marshall Smith, an undersecretary of education, said the proposed standards
"should be seen as the starting point of a reasonable and disciplined dialogue."
Instead, they came under a heavy attack from conservatives led by Lynne V.
Cheney, the former chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities,
which originally commissioned the standards.

She and others argued that the new standards strayed too far from the subject
matter of traditional American history, emphasized obscure figures in the name
of political correctness and lacked the affirmative tone they say American
history deserves. The authors responded that Mrs. Cheney mischaracterized the
content, but the United States Senate voted 99 to 1 in January not to endorse
the standards.

Yet far from the glare of the political debate, visits to six high schools in
the New York metropolitan area found that history teachers in the classroom are
already embracing the spirit of the standards.

Not always with success. In one city high school, a class divided into groups to
analyze the New Deal but did not seem to know much about it. In a suburban
school, a teacher asked students to pretend to be workers and managers in a late
19th-century factory. But none of the students knew the meanings of the words
"ostentatious," "appalling," "barter," or "scab," much less about how
19th-century workers or managers might have approached labor negotiations.

For the most part, though, the new approaches to American history seemed to have
a profound impact.

"When I teach American history," said Diana Javis, assistant principal at the
John F. Kennedy High School in the Bronx, and a fan of the new methods, "I ask
them: 'What will your grandchildren ask you about? History is a living story.
It's your story.' "

She even asks students to interview their parents. "Parents love it," she said.
"As one young lady was questioning her mother, the phone rang, and the girl got
up to answer it. Her mother was very upset. She said, 'I'm talking about my
life!' "

Steve Shultz, an assistant principal who has been teaching for more than 22
years, the last 12 at the Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn, said: "Change
makes us uncomfortable. But history is changing anyway. That's what history is
all about."


Stuyvesant High
Debating Point: Hamilton's Vision

From the windows of Stuyvesant High School's new building overlooking the Hudson
River, students can see Ellis Island and the Statue of Liberty. Stuyvesant, with
2,800 students from every borough, is itself a monument to optimism and
excellence, called by many the best public high school in America. All the
seniors expect to go to four-year colleges. By late fall, it is not unusual to
meet Ivy League scouts in class.

Two classes crushed into a room one morning for a debate over Alexander
Hamilton. In Hamilton's time, Alan Krinsky, the moderator, said: "We were a
rural nation, beset with problems. In 1789, North Carolina and Rhode Island
reluctantly ratified the Constitution. The smart money was not on American
survival. Alexander Hamilton was the first Secretary of the Treasury."

The debate: Whether or not Hamilton's vision was the right one for the time.

Speaking for Hamilton were Eugene Babenko, 16, and Christina Chan, 17. Speaking
against him were Elaine Kung, 17, and Danica Lo, 16.

"Hamilton was a stand-up politician," argued Eugene. "His views, which may have
been monarchist and pro-British, alienated his comrades at the Constitutional
Convention, but this did not stop him." He went on to praise Hamilton's support
for Federalism and his insistence that the central government assume the debts
of the states.

"States like Virginia, which had paid their debts, now had to pay for others,"
Elaine retorted. "His economic policies benefited merchants at the expense of
farmers."

"Hamilton protected an infant democracy," Christina argued.

"He protected the rich," Elaine shot back.

Ultimately, judged on evidence, reason, delivery, pertinence and quality of
rebuttal, the moderator decided that the anti-Hamilton arguments had won by a
narrow margin.

A few doors down, Warren Donin's African-American history class, an elective,
was full, with 41 students jockeying for seats. This day's main discussion was
over the word 'Holocaust,' and whether it should be used to describe the
experiences of African-Americans or whether using the word trivialized the
experiences of the European victims of the Nazis. The students failed to resolve
the question, spilling out into the hallway at the end of the class, still
passionately arguing.

When the students don't know what they think, Mr. Donin makes them take a
position and defend it anyway.

"He turns everything into a question," Nick Malis, 17, said later. Is the
Declaration of Independence a great document? I say, 'Sure. Why wouldn't it be?'
'Well, all 'men' are created equal. What does it mean?'

"When I come to this class. I'm happy. It's my favorite class. It's really
changed the way I see."

Gary S. Laveman, the assistant principal, who oversees social studies, said of
the standards' approach: "This is nothing new.  I think you have to deal with
American history realistically. When the Pilgrims came here, other people were
living here. You're not inventing or reinventing anything. You're looking at
what is here. The question is the emphasis. When Crispus Attucks gets as
important as George Washington, we have a problem."


Robeson High
Crispus Attucks: Absence Noted

It was the absence of Crispus Attucks that bothered the students in Keith
Walter's class at the Paul Robeson High School for Business and Technology in
the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.

Students at the school are participating in the American Social History project
underwritten by City University, the Aaron Diamond Foundation and the Board of
Education. The project emphasizes the role of working men and women in American
history.

On this morning, passing by signs ordering them not to wear hats or bandanas or
Walkmen at school, the students watched "Tea Party Etiquette," a video that
included the reading of an account from George Robert Twelves Hewes, a Boston
shoemaker who saw the Boston Massacre and three years later took part in the
Boston Tea Party.

The students found the British accents hard to understand, but they got the
point that resistance to British policies came not only from George Washington,
Thomas Jefferson and John Adams, but also from ordinary people.

On the day that British soldiers, attacked by a mob, opened fire at what became
known as the Boston Massacre, many young apprentices were in the crowd. The
students looked at several renderings of this scene. Attucks appeared in only
one depiction. The scruffy apprentices appeared in none.

"How can three pictures of the same event look so different?" Mr. Walter asked
the class. "Why did they resort to violence?"

The students gathered in groups to talk about the questions and write their
answers. The project stresses working together. The history classes are
coordinated with literature classes for the same period.

"Our approach is student-centered," said Roberta Koza, assistant principal for
communication arts. She teaches the literature part of the American Social
History project. "We start with the self," she said. "Most of the self in this
building is African-American. We're getting people to start making connections,
to understand that they bring something to the table as well."

Last year, Ms. Koza taught two classes in this program, one regular class and
one for honors students. To her delight, the students in the regular class,
unaware they were not honors students, performed almost as well as the honors
class.

"They rose to the occasion on all levels," she said. This year, all the juniors
in the school are included.


Dix Hills, L.I.
Whose Liberty? Whose Tyranny?

It was 9:10 A.M. in a comfortable schoolroom at Half Hollow Hills East High
School in Dix Hills, a wealthy Long Island suburb. The dates chalked on the
blackboard were 1763 and 1776. If anything looked like a traditional American
history class, this was it. Then Gloria Sesso, who was among the teachers who
helped draft the new national history standards, turned from the board to the
students, and the illusion disappeared.

At the end of the French and Indian War, Mrs. Sesso said: "England passes the
Proclamation Line of 1763. No one can go past the Appalachian Mountains. This
land belongs to the Native Americans. Do you think it's a good idea?"

"It appeases the Indians," Benjamin Oren said.

"The British can't afford to keep troops there," Mrs. Sesso said. "It will
create more trading privileges. She walked slowly up an aisle between the desks.
"This sounds wonderful, but the colonists shout 'Tyranny!' Why do they think it
belongs to them?'

"They fought for this land," one student answered.

"They thought they had the right to expand."

Mrs. Sesso stalked back to the blackboard, not satisfied.

"Why did they think the Proclamation Line was imprisoning them?" she asked.
"Would you have supported the Proclamation Line? Who's right? Is England being
unfair? Tyrannical?"

The answers to the questions were not in the textbook.

"It's important for someone to have control after a war, to maintain order,"
Brett Sherman said. "They were right in preserving order."

"Imprisoning them," said Mrs. Sesso in the tone of a district attorney. "You're
really into freedom and democracy." The students shifted uneasily in their
chairs.

"Next step," Mrs. Sesso said. "England has a program. They propose a stamp tax
in 1765 to help pay for the war. The colonists think the Stamp Act is tyranny.
Why?"

She handed out photocopies of arguments written at the time for and against it.
"Who do you think has the stronger argument?" Hands shot up.

"The British case is destroyed by the colonists' case," said Duane Koh.
"Everyone in England could have a say in Parliament, but a colonial person had
no representative in Parliament. The colonists were right."

"The colonists were English," said Matthew Wurse, disagreeing.

"They were English, but now they're Americans," David Scheine said. "They have a
different society."

"Is it tyranny?" Mrs. Sesso asked. "Patrick Henry gets up and says we should tax
ourselves. All of a sudden, George Grenville is being hung in effigy. What does
it mean to be hung in effigy? Is it a legitimate form of protest?"

"In Massachusetts, they go to Governor Hutchinson's house screaming 'Liberty! No
stamps!' and they burn it down because he's in cahoots with the stamp tax.
What's the matter?"

"It would make the British come down on them," Melissa Sharoun said. "They're
being radical and challenging the social order."

"Who's exercising tyranny here?" Mrs. Sesso asked. "England or the mob burning
down the house?"

There was no letup as Mrs. Sesso drew almost every student in.

"In most other classes, teachers tell you something, and you daze out," Lauren
Chernick, one of Mrs. Sesso's students, said later. In history class, she said,
"You're up. People want your opinion. It makes you want to understand it."

The heart of the morning's lesson, Mrs. Sesso said later, was the concept of
liberty.

"I want them to identify that the nature of freedom means different things to
different people," she said.

"You don't separate details from ideas," she said. "Otherwise, you're discussing
hot air."

"There's a difference between education and indoctrination," she said. "I think
American values are reinforced with the ability to choose and think. That's what
freedom is about, making choices."


Boys and Girls High
Bitter Lessons Of a Slave Ship

The sculpture outside the Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn looks like it
might be one more security device, three gently curving slabs of concrete, side
by side. Few of the 4,600 students bother to take a closer look as they go in
and out of the nation's 14th largest high school.

Steve Shultz, a history teacher, goes outside with his classes and asks them to
look again. Up close, they see a narrow band of bronze bas-relief showing
families in chains. One figure kneels in agony. Perhaps it is a person being
branded, perhaps whipped, perhaps both. The students look closely.

Then Mr. Shultz asks them to walk between the slabs, to crowd together inside
the narrow curves. They see other strips of bronze filled with small faceless
figures, despairing, packed together in the narrow hold of a slave ship. Some
try to comfort others.

The figures have ropes around their necks. The loose ropes belong to the
captives who have died. The students begin to talk. Up close, the stone reminds
them of the sea, of the sky, its surface the texture of prison.

The students were not used to standing so close together, they said afterward.
Because they had studied slavery, they thought about those who endured a passage
to America and bondage.

Last year, the students were so moved that they sent poems, essays, drawings and
letters to the sculptor, Ed Wilson, professor emeritus in art at the State
University at Binghamton. They put these, with his answer, in a book they
published themselves.

"History is more important than facts," Mr. Shultz said. "History is feelings.
If you're doing it from a textbook, you can't capture that feeling."

Keeler Dunbar, one of Mr. Shultz's students, said: "In slavery, to give slaves
knowledge was to give them power." She said the sculpture made her think "maybe
they could be going through what I'm going through."

"My mother dropped out early in her third year," she said. "She always said
education was No. 1. I'm going to live out some of her dreams."

Boys and Girls is a high school with few amenities, but Mr. Shultz helps his
students learn to do outside research. The proposed standards also suggest that
students take advantage of community resources.

Selena Judge went to the library of the New York Historical Society to look for
answers to a quiz of 30 little-known history facts. "It was so fascinating," she
said. "I found that Adams and Jefferson died on the same day in the same year.

"We take class discussions outside the class," she said. "Sometimes I drive my
mother crazy, applying history to everything in the house."

Another student said Mr. Shultz's class had so inspired her she went "from a 34
to a 95 average in one semester."

"It's not cheerleading," Mr. Shultz said.  "The kids see they're dealing with
real history, their history. When you see the value, it goes beyond history."

The Journey, the Struggle The Tale of Our Past

 By Denetra Taylor

Everyday we complain about how

hard life is
Everyday we die by the hands of our

own race.
Everyday we are called niggers by

people who are the same color as us.
Everyday we are on a journey.
I bring a tale unlike others those of our African sistgern and

brothers.
Our ancestors were brought here

against their will.
Many survuved, but many were killed.
They spent many months on a slave

ship.
Their backs were blody from the

white man's whip.
Bound together day and night.
Many of them never saw the light.
The men were humiliated
The women were raped
They were stripped of their humanity

and they didn't know their own fate.
Aboard these ships were men, women

and children.
They were treated like cargo and not

like humans.
But this didn't stop them they went on
They strived and struggled for a new

dawn.
For this reason we must go on and

stay alive
We must go on, we must survive.

 Denetra Taylor, a 1994 graduate of Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn, was
part of a history class that produced a literary booklet about a sculpture
outside the school that depicts a slave ship crossing.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 8, 1995, Saturday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about new approaches to teaching
history in high schools misstated the subject of a student discussion in a
hallway of Stuyvesant High School in New York City. The students were debating
whether the word "holocaust" should apply to the experiences of
African-Americans; they were not discussing the American Revolution.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Advanced-placement students at Boys and Girls High School in
Brooklyn squeezed into a bronze sculpture on school grounds that illustrates the
cramped conditions inside a ship carrying slaves to lifelong bondage in the
Americas. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times) (pg. B1); Left, Gloria Sesso,
history teacher at Half Hollow Hills East High School in Dix Hills, L.I., tries
to stimulate discussion. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)
At Stuyvesant High School, debate over the American Revolution goes on outside
class: Lindsey Stower-Burns, with backpack; Algerlynn Gill, center, and Rachel
Sur, gesturing at right. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times) (pg. B9)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Head of Army Forces in the U.S. Is Selected as New Chief of Staff

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 5


President Clinton has selected the head of Army forces in the United States to
be the next Army Chief of Staff, senior officials in the Administration said
today.

The officials said the White House intended to nominate Gen. Dennis J. Reimer,
55, the commander of the Army's Forces Command in Atlanta, to replace Gen.
Gordon R. Sullivan, who will retire in June. An official announcement could come
later this week.

General Reimer was Defense Secretary William J. Perry's choice for the job, but
some White House officials lobbied hard for Gen. Barry McCaffrey, the head of
United States forces in Latin America.

General McCaffrey, a highly decorated Vietnam War veteran and commander in the
Persian Gulf war, became known to the President after a young female aide at the
White House, who was never identified, snubbed the general when he said hello to
her shortly after Mr. Clinton became President.

General Reimer inherits an Army that is scheduled to shrink to 495,000 troops
next year, its lowest level since 1940, while facing an increasing number of
peacekeeping and humanitarian missions in places like Rwanda and Haiti. The
general will also take over a plan that General Sullivan started, known as Force
XXI, that is intended to improve the Army's battlefield communications.

As the head of the Forces Command over the last two years, General Reimer has
been responsible for 235,000 active-duty troops and 674,000 reservists in the
United States.

He has held several field commands as well as two of the Army's highest staff
jobs: operations director and Vice Chief of Staff.

A soft-spoken Oklahoman who graduated from the United States Military Academy at
West Point in 1962, General Reimer served two tours of duty in Vietnam, where he
was awarded the Bronze Star and the Purple Heart. He later served as commander
of the Third Corps Artillery at Fort Sill, Okla., chief of staff of United
States Army forces in South Korea and commander of the Fourth Infantry Division
at Fort Carson, Colo.

In Washington, he served as the Army deputy chief of staff for operations and
plans during the gulf war before becoming Vice Chief of Staff, the Army's No. 2
uniformed job.

His appointment is expected to set off a chain reaction of job changes among the
Army's senior generals. Gen. John H. Tilelli, the Vice Chief of Staff, is
expected to take General Reimer's place at Forces Command.  Lieut. Gen. Ronald
H. Griffith, the Army Inspector General, would receive a fourth star and take
over as Vice Chief of Staff.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Pondering a Cease-Fire in the Drug War

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


In an uncomfortably apt comparison, one of the officials featured on "America's
War on Drugs: Searching for Solutions" likens the drug war to the Vietnam war:
After many expensive years the battle continues with no prospect of victory, and
the strain on society keeps worsening.

Catherine Crier's plain-talking report finds a mayor, a police chief and a judge
making the case for "harm reduction": the decriminalizing or legalizing of at
least some drugs and an emphasis on treatment instead of jails.

Judge James Gray of the California Superior Court, who calls himself a
conservative, suggests that drugs be sold, with warning labels on them, at
government stores. Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimore and Nick Pastore, the police
chief of New Haven, more or less agree. Frustrated by the law's failure to stop
drug use, the three want to take the criminal profit out of the business and
concentrate on treating addicts who seem to be treatable.

Tonight's main opposition voice comes from William Bennett, the former national
drug czar, who has had more success at producing an anthology of moral tales
than he ever had at reducing drug use. He warns that any steps toward
decriminalizing would only encourage the young to indulge. "It's a matter of
right and wrong," he declares, perhaps quoting from his book.

So Mr. Bennett finds little appeal in the approaches favorably noted here: In
the Netherlands, some drugs, like marijuana and hashish, can be openly bought
and openly enjoyed; in Britain, a few hundred addicts are receiving their heroin
fix by legal prescription.

You can see marijuana fanciers puffing away in an Amsterdam coffeehouse; an
official says they are thus spared the need to resort to criminals who would try
to hook them on harder drugs. While the Dutch police concentrate on traffickers,
health workers try to unhook heroin users or at least give them clean needles to
hold down the spread of AIDS.

And you will meet two of the British hard-core addicts who are on legal
heroin-maintenance programs that permit them to work and live relatively normal
lives, without resort to drug dealers. The experimental effort's medical
proponents point out that heroin in its pure form, unlike that sold on the
streets, is "a remarkably safe drug." Early studies indicate that dealers,
losing their customers, are leaving the streets.

Despite the attractions of the harm-reduction approach, Mayor Schmoke, Chief
Pastore and Judge Gray find themselves in the minority in the United States,
where the problem is far bigger than anything facing the Dutch or the British.
Dr. Mitchell Rosenthal, head of Phoenix House and a treatment pioneer, also
favors locking up drug users, at least those who aren't ready for Phoenix House.
He calls heroin-maintenance "a bust" and is not convinced that needle exchanges
are making a difference.

If America moves at all toward decriminalizing, tonight's report suggests, the
first beneficiaries are likely to be marijuana smokers. Dr. Lester Grinspoon, a
professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School, says that there is no
evidence whatever that marijuana leads to harder drugs, and that in any case it
is far less of a health problem than alcohol or tobacco.

Ms. Crier recalls that more than 20 years ago a panel of experts appointed by
President Nixon recommended that the possession and sale of small amounts of
marijuana should no longer be illegal, yet they remain crimes, at least on the
books, throughout the country.

"America's War on Drugs" leaves little doubt that serious changes in drug
policies will not come without considerable resistance from those, like Mr.
Bennett, who fear that permitting the sale of hard drugs would hook 40 or 50
million more users. But Judge Gray, who dismisses such predictions as
"fear-mongering," must be speaking for many exasperated Americans as well as for
the producers of tonight's program when he says, "We almost can't do any worse
than we are today."

If you are hooked by this hour, stay tuned for tonight's "Nightline" panel on
drug legalization.

AMERICA'S WAR ON DRUGS: SEARCHING FOR SOLUTIONS

ABC, tonight at 10.
(Channel 7 in New York)

Jeff Diamond, executive producer. Segments produced by Jeff Diamond, Martin
Phillips, John Lower, Peter Poor and Marnie Inskip; Rudy Bednar, senior
producer; George Paul, director. An ABC News special. Catherine Crier,
correspondent.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A coffee shop patron in Amsterdam enjoys his marijuana legally.
(ABC News)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

So Where Is That Lava Lamp Now?

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section C;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 1237 words


THE counterculture collecting? The idea seems slightly absurd; after all, the
Age of Aquarius was hardly the Age of Acquisition.

Nevertheless, some members of this generation still cling to the objects of the
1960's -- lava lamps, Fillmore posters, campy clothes -- if not the spirit.

Following are observations on quintessential 1960's design from men and women
whose names are still associated with the period. Here are the keepsakes and
touchstones they've hung on to -- and the parts of flower-power style they hope
will never bloom again.



Tom Wolfe, author:

"I do have a large collection of socks from the 60's. There were some wild Op
Art designs: a lot of chevrons and checkerboards and things like baseball socks
with stripes up the side. They're in all different colors -- chocolate, yellow,
red. The ones that haven't worn out I still wear.

"There is one thing I'm nostalgic for. Historians always have long faces when
they discuss the 60's, and mention Vietnam and the riots. But looking back on
it, there was a marvelous kind of goofy innocence. And it was a very prosperous
period. It was long enough after the Depression for a whole generation to grow
up with no memory of it."

Yoko Ono, artist and composer:

"I am so glad that I kept the swinging London 60's clothes, because now they're
retro.

"I gave the long dresses to Sean's women friends who became my friends as well.
Sean's wearing the embroidered jackets and the capes.

"The hot pants? I'm saving them for myself."

Stewart Brand, president of the Global Business Network, a research and
consulting concern, and former editor of The Whole Earth Catalogue:

"The graphic art was dreadful, the drugs didn't go anywhere and the sex just led
to a plague. But the soft technology and environmental awareness continues to
develop.

"The main thing that did last is computers. The 'power to the people' ideal
didn't work so well politically, but the hackers put it right into the machine.
They kind of embodied the counterculture.

"As for me, I have a rattle and feathers from Indian peyote ceremonies, and the
costume top hat I wore to the Trips Festival in San Francisco in 1966.

"I remember that we went around to all the hotels with promotional literature
for the festival, and the people in the lobby kept saying, 'Oh, the travel desk
is over there.' "

Ultra Violet, artist and former star of Andy Warhol's films:

"I adore God, not objects. But I do have a collection of Andy Warhol paintings.
My favorite is called 'Two Flowers.' It looks like a poppy but no one knows what
it is; it's nondenominational. The scale of it is Babylonian. My whole living
room is designed around it. Every fabric has a flower motif. It looks like a
Garden of Eden with trees."

Milton Glaser, artist and graphic designer:

"The wonderful thing about the 60's was the wrenching away from these universal
ideas about design -- that it had to be embodied in Bauhaus principles and be
simple and pure.

"Suddenly there was this explosion. Design could be more random, more
disorderly, more colorful.

"I liked the opening up of possibilities, but the things that are associated
with me I just can't shake.

Jane Hitchcock, model:

"I started at 14 and I'm still modeling today. Models over 40 have careers now,
and that would have been unheard of in the 60's."

Joan Didion, author:

"During the 60's, we got a lot of clear plastic and colored glass things that
you could look through, like kaleidoscopes. They were cheap things of the
period, easy to find, and I still have them -- even more of them now.

"I got married in the 60's, and it was the first time I had a house, and these
were just the things I wanted to fill it with.

"I have a much better sense of the way things looked like in the 50's: bare and
Swedish. That was distinct. The 60's weren't really like that. I don't think Op
Art was anything people had in their houses, unless they perceived their house
as a set."

Larry Rivers, artist:

"My favorite aspect of the 60's is that I was young."

Betsey Johnson, fashion designer:

"I think the 60's were the last time real new clothing ever got invented. Since
then, we've been rehashing.

"In the 1960's, I did a plastic dress called the Kit Dress, which was a
cellophane slip wth metallic stick-on shapes you could decorate it with.

"I also created the Growing Herb Paper Dress: it was made of something like
Handi Wipe fabric with little seeds embedded in it. When you watered it, it
actually sprouted and became this little fuzzy green thing."

Ken Kesey, author:

"We've still got everything, including the most famous bus in the world. But I
can't think about it too much now. I have to feed my cows."

Abe Peck, author and professor at the Medill School of Journalism, Northwestern
University:

"This weekend I'm actually going to frame some of the covers of The Seed, the
Chicago underground newspaper I worked on. I have the women's liberation cover,
which featured Olive Oyl giving Popeye a raised-fist salute. And the cover that
came out after Kent State, which shows Mickey Mouse wearing a Richard Nixon
watch. We sold 35,000 copies of that in four days."

Timothy Leary, self-described "dissonant philosopher and chaos engineer":

"The 60's were unstylish, unfashionable, unchic and unelitist. I hated tie-dye,
and poor Nehru ruined his reputation. The essence of the 60's was a populist
movement, but there was a dress code among the hippies that was stronger than
the ones at West Point and Park Avenue.

Gaetano Pesce, architect and furniture designer:

"In my house in Venice I have an Up 5 chair with an ottoman, both of which I
designed in 1968. These pieces are an exception, because I usually don't like to
surround myself with things from the past.

For me, these designs were not only able to express advancement in technology
through the use of an innovative material -- polyurethane foam -- but also the
first time that political meaning was given expression through an industrial
object. It was the image of a woman carrying a heavy ball. This evokes the
condition of a prisoner -- the weight of prejudice that women, as well as
creative people, were subjected to throughout history."

Craig Braun, designer of album packaging, posters and logos for groups like Led
Zeppelin and the Rolling Stones:

"I think music, especially the Beatles', was really the driving force behind
design, life style and fashion -- even bean-bag chairs. My favorite object of
the period is the sculpted-mouth 'Marilyn' sofa by Stendig.

Paul Krassner, author and editor of The Realist:

"My favorite object is a poster reproducing a centerfold of The Realist from
1967. It's called 'The Disneyland Memorial Orgy,' drawn by Wally Wood of Mad
magazine. He did a charming soft-core version of what would happen if all these
Disney characters' suppressed libidos were being released.

"I also have a T-shirt John Lennon gave me. It has a lithograph of him playing a
piano, and in black letters it has the word 'Imagine.' I wear it every December
around his birthday. Once I was doing stand-up comedy, and this woman asked me
about it. I went into this long explanation about the quality of imagination
being a hallmark of the 60's. She said, 'Why are you doing this?' I said, 'Well,
it says "Imagine." ' She said, 'Oh, I thought you said I. Magnin.' "

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gaetano Pesce's "Up" series, 1968: politics in polyurethane.
(Pesce, Ltd.); Hot pants forever: Yoko Ono and John Lennon, 1971. (Associated
Press); Protestors burn bras, 1968. (William E. Sauro/The New York Times ); Ken
Kesey, center, at pranksters' Acid Graduation, 1968. (Ted Steshinsky/Pix)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Thomas Mandel, 49, Specialist In Developing On-Line Services

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 378 words


Thomas F. Mandel, a computer specialist who helped develop on-line computer
services, died on Wednesday at Stanford Hospital in Stanford, Calif. He was 49
and lived in Mountain View, Calif.

The cause was lung cancer, which he had disclosed on the electronic forums he
helped create.

Mr. Mandel was a management consultant at SRI International, specializing in the
development of computer services. He used a technique known as scenario-based
planning to analyze the impact of new technology on the communications,
publishing, paper and automobile industries.

His interest in communications led him to explore local computer bulletin boards
in the San Francisco area, most notably the Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link, better
known as the Well. He concluded from early studies that the role of computer
networks would be as a medium for new types of person-to-person communications,
rather than as a distribution mechanism for printed information.

Prolific and strongly opinionated, he became one of the most visible and
controversial characters on the Well. "He brought some kind of intellectual
respectability to the high-tech bull session," said Howard Rheingold, author of
the book about the on-line networks, "The Virtual Community."

Time Inc. hired Mr. Mandel as a consultant in 1993 to develop electronic
versions of its magazines and managed the company's bulletin boards at Amercia
Online.

A self-described "cyberholic," Mr. Mandel struggled to balance the allure of the
new medium with his professional and personal life. When he was diagnosed with
inoperable cancer six months ago, he discussed the progress of his disease in
various computer forums.

Two weeks ago he bid farewell to his on-line companions. "I cannot tell you how
sad and grief-stricken I am that I cannot stay to play and argue with you much
longer," he wrote.

Mr. Mandel was born in Chicago and reared in Hawaii. He enlisted in the Marine
Corps in 1965 and served in Vietnam. Returning to the United States, he earned a
B.A. degree in futuristics from the University of Hawaii in 1972.

He is survived by his wife, Maria A. Syndicus; his mother, Edna Bunte Mandel of
San Mateo, Calif.; a sister, Susan B. Cathey of Fresno, Calif., and a brother,
Steve Mandel of New York.

NAME: Thomas F. Mandel

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Into the Woods in Asia;
Myanmar? North Korea? No Sweat for Hong Kong Firm

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 39;   Column 2;   Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1542 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, April 7


Francis Pike liked what he saw in North Korea on a reconnaissance trip for
Peregrine Investment Holdings Ltd., the Hong Kong investment bank, in the fall
of 1993.

It was a place of pervasive tyranny and cultish obeisance to a "great leader."
The Communist Government was an international pariah, accused by the United
States and other Western countries of feverishly building nuclear weapons,
shipping missiles to the Middle East, fomenting terrorism, kidnapping its
critics abroad and crushing domestic dissent. And the country was overwhelmed by
poverty.

"Clearly, their economy was a catastrophe," Mr. Pike recalled. "There really was
no economic life there."

It was, in short, the sort of place that Peregrine found appealing. For North
Korea had one huge asset: opportunity. "They clearly gave the indication that
things were going to change," he said. "I think they're expecting us to be able
to bring in capital, companies and clients."

Since that trip, Peregrine has formed a joint banking venture with the Daeson
Group, which is controlled by the North Korean Government. And while Peregrine
remains the only outside investment firm active in the country, it is also doing
business with other countries where many investment banks may tread warily, or
not at all.

It was the first investment bank to move into Myanmar, formerly Burma, ruled by
a military dictatorship. It was one of the first to go to Communist-ruled
Vietnam. And, when other companies and banks stepped back after the Tiananmen
Square massacre in Beijing in June 1989, the newly created Peregrine only
accelerated its activities in China.

Such willingness to take gambles, combined with a talent for making friends in
high places, has helped Peregrine grow from a start-up with $38 million to spend
into a regional powerhouse in a little more than six years. But its willingness
to strike alliances with some of Asia's more unsavory regimes, and accusations
of unethical behavior ranging from market manipulation to plagiarism, have
created a serious image problem for the bank.

Its ties with the Myanmar Government, which crushed civil unrest in the late
1980's and continues to imprison the leader of the country's democratic
opposition, have soured some of its investors, for example. The Quantum Fund
N.V., run by the American financier George Soros, recently divested itself of
10,000 shares of Peregrine stock.

While other Western companies have footholds in China and Vietnam, some
human-rights advocates dislike what they regard as Peregrine's unapologetic
embrace of dictatorial regimes. "We're strongly opposed to any business going
into a country like North Korea or Burma or even China unless it is willing to
press for human rights and a greater respect for the rule of law," said Sidney
Jones, executive director of Human Rights Watch/Asia in New York.

The Economist magazine noted recently that while other banks did business in
China, "the difference is that Peregrine does not even affect to hold its nose."

None of this fazes Philip L. Tose, Peregrine's chairman and co-founder, who
contends that a dismal political or human-rights record of a regime is no reason
to avoid a lucrative market. "Yes, there had been a very unfortunate incident
which had a lot of coverage, shocked a lot of people," Mr. Tose said of the
Tiananmen Square killings. "But underneath all that, nothing really had changed
in terms of the fundamentals that had made people originally want to invest in
those areas.

"Our view," Mr. Tose said, "and it's a very controversial view, is that
countries develop through economic dialogue. Simply introducing political
democracy is not necessarily the first step that should be taken. It is better
to increase the standard of living of the people, which in turn will lead over
time to social change, political change, etc."

Francis Leung Pak To, Peregrine's managing director and Mr. Tose's partner, said
the bank had come to the conclusion "that these events were just a hiccup."

"We decided we wanted to take advantage of depressed market conditions at the
time," he said. Peregrine rapidly bought control of two companies which it used
to expand its asset base and to raise capital.

Mr. Tose also brushes aside ethical lapses by his bank. In 1993, the Securities
and Futures Commission of Hong Kong reprimanded Peregrine for engaging in
"trading activity which was, or was likely to be, prejudicial to the interests
of the investing public" by buying back shares that it had previously sold in an
effort to disguise the real market for those shares.

"It happened at a time we were growing very fast and frankly we didn't have the
right systems in place of checks and balances," Mr. Tose said. "We have now. I
think a recurrence of something like that would be difficult."

But tripping over the line of the permissible did not end there. Earlier this
year, Peregrine published a long research report on the economic prospects of
Myanmar. The report was intended to promote the group's own access to the
military regime and the country's business community; the problem, however, was
that the contents of the report were plagiarized from a report on Myanmar
written by a smaller Hong Kong securities firm, Kerry Securities.

Mr. Leung blamed the Myanmar office for the plagiarism, and said the office was
not closely supervised. "That was an example of growing pains," he said.

Whatever its public image, Peregrine has enjoyed a meteoric rise in Asian
banking. It was founded in late 1988 by Mr. Tose, who had previously headed a
Citicorp venture in Hong Kong, and by Mr. Leung, one of his rising stars there.
The two men cobbled together $38 million (United States) from some of Hong
Kong's wealthiest business leaders. Though the founders wanted to call their new
firm Falcon, they could not obtain rights to the name, Mr. Tose said, so they
chose Peregrine, a breed of the same bird of prey. "We like it because it's an
aggressive bird," Mr. Tose said. "It typifies what we are."

Since then, the capital base of Peregrine has soared to $550 million, which
would put it at the lower end of the top 20 investment banks in the United
States. It had revenue of $3.74 billion last year, up from $233 million in 1989.
And while profit fell last year, to $82.5 million from $112 million in 1993, Mr.
Tose said the results were not "nearly as bad as many of the international
investment banking houses." Peregrine also managed to tighten its grip on the
market for initial public offerings in China and Hong Kong, increasing its share
to 75 percent from 60 percent in 1993.

Analysts attribute much of the success of Peregrine to the founders' brilliant
choice of investors. They include Li Ka-shing, one of the world's richest men,
who made much of his fortune in Hong Kong's property market; Gordon Wu, a
property developer, and Larry Yung, head of the Hong Kong branch of the China
International Trust and Investment Corporation, the mainland's principal
investment bank.

Peregrine has also built an impressive list of high-level contacts across Asia,
where it has opened 25 offices in 14 countries, both its admirers and
competitors say.

Mr. Li, whose vast business empire includes ports in Hong Kong and China,
hotels, telecommunications ventures, satellite services and electric power
projects, made no bones about the importance of knowing the right people. And in
Asia, he said, that usually means having influence with the right families.

"If you were working in Europe or America at the turn of the century, your
connections were vital," Mr. Li said. "Without them, you were dead. Asia is to a
degree at that stage of development today. It's not quite, because everyone has
moved on a little bit. But business, industry, government to a degree, are
controlled by families just the way they were in the West at the turn of the
century."

Mr. Tose said he would like to reduce Peregrine's reliance on China and Hong
Kong to half its business from the current 80 percent. As a result, the bank
keeps pushing into other parts of Asia.

Today, for example, it has 250 employees in the three major cities of South
Korea and is the only foreign company with a seat on the Seoul stock exchange.
In Myanmar, it has opened Peregrine Capital Myanmar Ltd., which among other
things has invested in a shrimp-processing plant.

For some people, sniping at Peregrine for its supposed cozying up to
dictatorships smacks of sour grapes. "The success of Peregrine is a measure of
the failure of competitors to take advantage of market conditions," said a Hong
Kong banker who spoke on the condition of anonymity. "The market here needed a
local investment bank more in tune with their needs, particularly smaller
companies that want to come to the market."

A European banker here, who has watched Peregrine's march through Asia with some
admiration, said he had one major concern -- that the expansion had gone too
fast. "The jury is well and truly out," the banker said. "Management there is
very thin. For a company that size it is surprising that decisions are made by
three or four people. Clearly there is a lot of skepticism about whether they
can manage a business of that size."

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A desire to take risks and a talent for making friends in high
places have helped Peregrine Investment Holdings become an Asian powerhouse. It
was founded by Philip L. Tose, left, and Francis Leung Pak To. (Cornelis
Metselaar for The New York Times)

Map: "A Falcon Hunting Among Tigers" Location of Perigrine offices and joint
venture offices.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

If They Built a Memorial to the War In the Streets

BYLINE: By HERBERT MUSCHAMP

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 56;   Column 1;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 348 words


The war memorial may be our most distinguished form of "victim art." For
generations, American cities have carved out special places to honor those who
have sacrificed their lives for a cause. From Augustus Saint-Gaudens's Memorial
to Robert Gould Shaw to Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial, artists have
sought to wrest dignity and meaning from conflict and death.

The projects presented on these pages, many realized on site via computer
graphics, commemorate people killed in a war that may never be officially
declared. They are casualties of urban violence. School children, subway riders,
shop clerks: people who found themselves on the losing side of a battle for the
right to dwell in cities without risking their lives.

These seven projects were inspired, in part, by those impromptu offerings --
flowers, photographs, handwritten testimonials of love and remembrance -- that
have blossomed on New York City streets in recent years like some exotic new
perennial. These ephemeral offerings mourn individuals. But they also lament a
set of collective losses: loss of community, of control, of respect for the
dignity of life. When The Times Magazine asked Ellen F. Salpeter, executive
director of Threadwaxing Space, a not-for-profit Manhattan exhibition space, and
Anne R. Pasternak, executive director of Creative Time Inc., a national public
arts organization based in New York, to commission the proposals, the hope was
that the memorials would suggest ways to give the civic dimension of random
street crime an enduring, public form.

An enduring form on a more intimate level is practiced by a Manhattan outfit
called the Victim Services Agency, a kind of Red Cross for the urban wounded.
The agency is misnamed, really, for the task of its social workers is to
convince crime victims that they are actually heroes. It is to help them regain
power over their lives.

The artists who created these projects have faced a similar challenge. Though
occasioned by social calamity, their projects are offered in the optimistic
belief that a city can shape its fate.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Neil Estern -- AM I MY BROTHER'S KEEPER?
"Urban violence and murder within the community take such a variety of forms
that I am inclined to look for a universal symbol," says Estern, a veteran
public monument sculptor whose most recent commission is a life-size sculpture
of Fiorello LaGuardia. His proposal for a bronze figurative sculpture located in
Central Park links contemporary tragedy to the story of Cain and Abel -- the
first murder, according to biblical tradition.

Cain holds the rock; Abel tries to deflect the blow. But the two figures are
intertwined, irrationally inseparable. In the 19th century, Realist painters
sought to depict the heroism of everyday life. Estern's sculpture evokes the
daily inhumanity of life in the urban jungle. (DIGITAL IMAGE MANIPULATION BY
MARC BRYAN-BROWN)

Laurie Anderson -- THE BLOOD FOUNTAIN: MONUMENT TO MURDER
Red liquid gushes from a groove at the top and an opening on one side of
Anderson's 50-foot-high monument. As the liquid flows down the sides into a
circular pool at the base, it stains the white marble scarlet. The pool is
ringed with red lights that illuminate the fountain at night. Anderson, a
world-renowned performance artist and musician, adheres to the City Beautiful
ideal of adorning major civic spaces with heroic sculpture. A fountain of blood
is probably not what City Beautiful architects had in mind, but then they did
not envision a city where children pass through metal detectors on entering
school. (DIGITAL IMAGE MANIPULATION BY JAMES PORTO)

Glenn Ligon -- MEMORIALS
"For after all life is but a procession of shadows, and God knows why it is that
we embrace them so eagerly, and see them depart with such anguish, being
shadows," wrote Virginia Woolf in "Jacob's Room," her fictional elegy for a
young man killed in World War I. Ligon's project makes a painful stab at pinning
down fleeting lives: a series of plaques commemorating murder victims, each
mounted on a wall near the site where the murder occured. A photograph, dates of
birth and death and brief quotes by friends or relatives recalls the victim with
yearbook poignancy.

The city is full of plaques marking the lives and homes of great achievers.
Ligon's placques would mourn the death of potential. "Murder is the end of
possibility," writes Ligon, a 34-year-old conceptional artist whose works have
been exhibited at the Whitney. "We say: 'He was turning his life around' or 'She
was just about to start her first real job.' " (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRED R. CONRAD/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

Gary Simmons -- JUST TO GET A REP

Killed for a pair of designer sneakers: that was early shorthand for the moral
disintegration of inner-city youth and for the predicament of a society that is
very good at creating a desire for status symbols, less resourceful when it
comes to inspiring people with the hope.

Simmons's memorial, a set of gilded metal footprints modeled after sneaker
soles, commemorates those who had not yet reached the age of 25 when they lost
their lives. And the site -- a subway station -- reinforces the theme of
transitory life. Simmons, whose work is frequently about the influence of black
youth culture on the overall American society, says: "The memorial is both a
cautionary reminder and perhaps a comfort to those who look down at their feet
when they are afraid to make eye contact with another passenger while riding the
train." (FRED R. CONRAD/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Pepon Osorio -- FAMILIAS

We make the dead work hard. It's not enough that, in life, they had to drive a
cab, punch a keyboard, wait on tables. After they're gone, we call on their
memory to restore a sense of wholeness to the communities that failed them.

To memorialize taxi drivers slain on duty, Osorio, a Bronx-based artist known
for his community art, proposes a series of "portraits" -- videotapes, personal
memorabilia -- installed inside working cabs. The portraits would focus also on
the survivors, to show how their families were affected by the loss. Osorio says
that "this is not an installation about mourning; rather, it serves as a vehicle
to enhance awareness and instigate meaningful change." (FRED R. CONRAD/THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

Mel Chin -- GOUGE
Caryatids are cruel. Classical columns sculpted into human form, they stare out
impassively from the facades of buildings, unmoved as they survey the cityscape
of human ups and downs. Mel Chin, celebrated for work that deals with
environmental and social issues, has created a caryatid in negative, a fallen
architectural angel. Gouged with deliberate brutality out of two marble columns,
thereby jeopardizing the stability of the building they support, Chin's ghostly
figure wants to rock the scale of values that ranks real estate higher than
life.

"Gouge" also protests what Chin calls the "janitorial approach to tragedy,"
those "evasive and sanitizing strategies that the modern world invents to keep
our minds free from contemplation and reaction." Sweep it up, scrub it down,
turn it into tabloid fodder. (DIGITAL IMAGE MANIPULATION BY TAM MILLER AND
DALLAS MOORE)

Carrie Mae Weems and Jeffrey Hoone -- ODDS ARE AGAINST YOU
All it takes is a dollar and a death wish. Or, as they used to say, your money
or your life. Weems and Hoone's memorial is a pop art take on fate, a look at
the city as a diabolical pinball arcade. Designed for a public site in Harlem,
the project would be modeled after the machine used to select each week's
winning Lotto numbers. A new ball pops up every 21 minutes, corresponding to the
national murder rate. The balls are color-coded to represent the ethnicity of
the victims; the numerals represent their ages.

"Odds are against you" suggests how precipitously the stakes have risen in the
city of economic extremes. As the middle ground drops away, the options narrow:
it's instant riches or sudden death. But, hey, you never know. (DIGITAL IMAGE
MANIPULATION BY TAM MILLER AND DALLAS MOORE)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 548 words



International 3-15

A REAPPRAISAL OF VIETNAM
Robert S. McNamara, once a champion of escalating the Vietnam War, has concluded
in a new memoir that the United States should have withdrawn earlier. 1

CHECHEN HEALTH CARE CRISIS
Like most things in the capital of the Russian breakaway republic of Chechnya,
Grozny, the health care system is in ruins, with only three civilian hospitals
functioning. 3


U.S. WARNING TO RUSSIA
The United States has warned Russia that unless it cancels a project to build
nuclear reactors in Iran, plans for American-Russian nuclear cooperation will be
dropped. 4

ELECTION RACE IN PERU
President Alberto K. Fujimori, credited with reorganizing Peru's economy and
crushing a long guerilla insurgency, appears on his way to re-election. 10

FEARS FOR MACEDONIA
A resurgence of fighting in Bosnia and a reduction of United Nations forces in
Croatia have renewed fears that the Balkan conflict will move south into
Macedonia. 12

Mexican Government officials to talk with peasant rebels. 10

National 16-40

BANK LOANS UNDER SCRUTINY
Fearing that lending risks are rising, Federal regulators are moving to rein in
aggressive competition among banks for new business. 1

SEQUEL TO REPUBLICAN CONTRACT
The next 100 days of the Republican-led 104th Congress will probably be more
momentous than the first 100 days were.  1

NEW ANTI-ABORTION TACTIC
A lawyer for an Arizona anti-abortion group has adopted a tactic worrisome to
doctors who perform abortions: malpractice suits.  1

THE PEROT FACTOR, REDUX
The followers of Ross Perot, still angry with the nation's political system, are
debating whether to stand with the Republicans in 1996 or form a third party.  1


REASSESSING DEFEAT
Since losing the Civil War, the South has clung to an underdog valor, but a new
tourist attraction, Lee's Retreat, shows that is changing.16

TOWN'S UNPLEASANT PROSPECTS
An Alabama town is faced with losing a military base's economic presence and
with having to deal with its toxic garbage. 16

PRIVATE SCHOOLING
A Pittsburgh suburb has dealt with its financial problems by laying off teachers
and hiring a private company to run one of its schools.  26

Metropolitan 41-48, 60

RESTORING BROOKLYN'S BACKYARD
Brooklyn's last forest, which covers half the 525-acre Prospect Park, is dying,
a victim of mountain bikes and millions of footsteps. Now, after a Federal
report warned that the woodlands face extinction, supporters have developed a
multimillion-dollar, 25-year plan to restore the borough's arboreal soul.  1

PATAKI RISKS WATER WARS
Governor Pataki is threatening to disrupt the peace over precious drinking water
from the Delaware River. He wants to withdraw New York's financing from the
four-state Delaware River Basin Commission, which drafts rules on water
allocation, pollution, flood control and drought management.  41

TOUGH TIMES FOR CABDRIVERS
Economic shifts have made driving a yellow cab in New York a far tougher way to
make a living than it was only a few years ago.  41

Restaurantgoers view Tim Zagat as something of an icon.  41

Obituaries 50

Alton Meister, a biochemist involved in AIDS research.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 26 words


"We were wrong, terribly wrong. We owe it to future generations to explain why."

   ROBERT S. MCNAMARA, former Defense Secretary, on Vietnam. [12:3.]

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

McNamara Recalls, and Regrets, Vietnam

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 8


Robert S. McNamara, once a champion of the escalation of the Vietnam War, says
in a memoir to be published in the coming week that he has now concluded that
the United States "could and should have withdrawn from South Vietnam" in late
1963 after the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem or a year or so later.

In November 1963, 78 Americans had died in the war in Vietnam. In late 1964, the
total stood at 225. By the war's end in 1975, it had passed 58,000.

Mr. McNamara served as Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1968 and pushed so hard
for deeper American military involvement in 1964 and 1965 that the conflict in
Southeast Asia became known as "McNamara's War." Later, he broke with President
Lyndon B. Johnson and urged that a diplomatic solution be sought. Convinced that
the war was unwinnable, he left the Pentagon in 1968 to head the World Bank.

Identified in the public mind as a cold, calculating "numbers cruncher," Mr.
McNamara seems deeply stirred by his literary journey back to the 1960's. He
broke down in tears while talking to Diane Sawyer of ABC News for a program that
is to be broadcast next week. That profoundly embarrassed him, he said in an
interview today, "but the sense of grief and failure is strong."

The interviews and memoir represent Mr. McNamara's first substantive public
comment on the war after almost three decades in which he declined to discuss
it. In the book, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," (Times
Books, $27.50), he is unsparing in blaming himself and his Government
colleagues, including President Johnson, for a series of blunders that led to
tragedy.

"I want to put Vietnam in context," he writes, because he believes that Vietnam
helped make the American people cynical about their Government and because "it
is cynicism that makes Americans reluctant to support their leaders in the
actions necessary to confront and solve our problems at home and abroad."

Still highly active at 78, climbing mountains and striding through downtown
Washington in a pair of battered running shoes, Mr. McNamara offers a limited
defense of American policies, arguing that the errors he made were errors "not
of values and intentions but of judgment and capabilities." But he adds: "We
were wrong, terribly wrong. We owe it to future generations to explain why."

He lists "11 major causes for our disaster in Vietnam," including misjudging the
capacity of North Vietnam, underrating nationalism as a force in the world,
failing to recognize the limitations of high-tech equipment, failing to level
with Congress and the American public and, crucially, poor organization. Like
Winston Churchill in World War II, he says, Johnson needed a war cabinet.

Asked in the interview today whether the same mistakes could be repeated now, he
responded, "Absolutely, not only can be but are being repeated." American
difficulties in Bosnia and Somalia, he said, involved some similar errors.

In his book, Mr. McNamara says the ultimate cause of failure in Asia lay with
the South Vietnamese. Echoing what both Presidents John F. Kennedy and Johnson
said, Mr. McNamara states that it was the Asians' war, ultimately, to win or
lose.

After President Diem's death, a series of coups convinced American officials
that the South Vietnamese were incapable of putting together a stable
government.

By the mid-1960's, Mr. McNamara says, it was clear that "political stability did
not exist and was unlikely ever to be achieved" and "the South Vietnamese, even
with our training assistance and logistical support, were incapable of defending
themselves."

Drawing on his own papers and other Government documents, some of them just
declassified, Mr. McNamara insists that American bombing never seriously
threatened Hanoi's capacity to wage war and that American ground operations
never established any real, lasting security in the South Vietnamese
countryside.

Nor did the pacification program win many "hearts and minds," he writes.

But he and others, Mr. McNamara says, failed again and again to question flawed
assumptions and to face basic geopolitical questions as they escalated the war
again and again.

Looking back, he writes: "I deeply regret that I did not force a probing debate
about whether it would ever be possible to forge a winning military effort on a
foundation of political quicksand. It became clear then, and I believe it is
clear today, that military force -- especially when wielded by an outside power
-- cannot bring order in a country that cannot govern itself."

He identifies repeated occasions on which portents of trouble or opportunities
for disengagement were ignored: a dissent on the use of airpower from Gen. H. K.
Johnson, the Army Chief of Staff, in September 1964; a cable from Ambassador
Maxwell Taylor in December 1964; a warning against escalation from President
Johnson's old senatorial mentor, Richard B. Russell of Georgia, in June 1965.

When diplomatic initiatives were undertaken, Mr. McNamara says, they were often
spoiled by what he terms a "miserable failure to integrate and coordinate our
military and diplomatic actions." Several times, he says, just when Hanoi had
been told to watch for signs of good faith, it was subjected to stepped-up
bombing.

Finally, Mr. McNamara says, he despaired of changing things. In a memo he sent
President Johnson on May 19, 1967, as his doubts crystallized, he warned:

"There may be limits beyond which many Americans and much of the world will not
permit the United States to go. The picture of the world's greatest superpower
killing or seriously injuring 1,000 noncombatants a week, while trying to pound
a tiny backward nation into submission on an issue whose merits are hotly
disputed, is not a pretty one. It could conceivably produce a costly distortion
in the American national consciousness and in the world image of the United
States."

Mr. McNamara says he belatedly concluded that the domino theory enunciated by
President Dwight D. Eisenhower and subscribed to by his three successors was
wrong: The loss of South Vietnam never threatened to undermine the entire
American position in Asia or to undercut United States credibility elsewhere.

"On the contrary," he writes, "it is possible we would have improved our
credibility by withdrawing from Vietnam and saving our strength for more
defensible stands elsewhere."

Others in Government reached similar conclusions but did not share them widely.
Mr. McNamara discloses that Richard Helms, at that time the Director of Central
Intelligence, sent President Johnson an eyes-only memo in September 1967 that
the President showed to no one and that Mr. McNamara only recently read. Based
on a detailed agency study, it said that, contrary to what was then established
American doctrine, the effects of "an unfavorable outcome in Vietnam" -- a
United States defeat or withdrawal -- "would not be permanently damaging to this
country's capacity to play its part as a world power working for order and
security in many areas."

Mr. McNamara writes that he believes President Kennedy would have eventually
decided to withdraw from Vietnam, had he lived, but he offers no details to
support the assertion.

The book contains other revelations, among them President Johnson's tentative
offer of the 1964 Democratic vice presidential nomination to Mr. McNamara.

But it sheds little light on the circumstances of Mr. McNamara's departure from
the Pentagon. As the Defense Secretary's relations with the President soured, he
indicates, George Woods, then the World Bank president, approached him about the
job, and he indicated interest. Mr. Johnson approved the idea, and the deal was
done. But Mr. McNamara says it is not clear whether the President was involved
from the start.

"I do not know to this day whether I quit or was fired," he writes. "Maybe it
was both."

NAME: Robert S. McNamara

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "We were wrong, terribly wrong," writes former Defense Secretary
Robert S. McNamara, shown here in his office in Washington. (Stephen Crowley/The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 11; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words



PLAYS AND MORE

A full plate of theater, art and music is available at the Schoolhouse in Croton
Falls today. Five one-act plays by members of the new Schoolhouse Writers
Workshop will be presented at 1 P.M. under the direction of Douglas Michael.

The five plays are "Washing Windows" by Jon Mann, "Alma's Heart" by Nanette
Washton, "Untitled" by John Spamos "Geometry" by William Buchler and "The Red
Canoe" by Mary Louise Cox. Admission is free.

Three Vietnamese painters are featured in an exhibition at the Schoolhouse
Galleries, exemplifying their country's less politicized atmosphere in which the
visual arts have more opportunity to flourish. The display of works by Dang Xuan
Hua, Tran Luong, and Cam Hoang Hong can be seen today through May 14, Tuesdays
through Sundays from 1 to 5 P.M.

Western oil painting did not appear in Vietnam until 1898, and it did not emerge
as a profession until 1925, when the French established the Ecole des Beaux-Arts
de l'Indochine there. A public reception for the artists, with music and food of
Vietnamese origin, is scheduled on April 23 from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.

Ed Polcer, a cornetist and bandleader, will give a concert in swingtime with his
all-star aggregation today at 7 P.M. He has spent more than 20 years honing his
style at Eddie Condon's in Manhattan, with the Benny Goodman Sextet, at jazz
festivals throughout the United States and Canada, on recordings and movie
soundtracks. Tickets are $18 in advance. Call 277-3461 or 277-8477 for
reservations or information about any of the events.

QUILTMAKING AS ART

Among the many one-of-a-kind quilts on display at the Rye Arts Center through
May 6 is one bearing a likeness of Marilyn Monroe, putting the actress into the
category of presidents, military heroes, family members, historical events and
other subjects deemed sufficiently notable to be thus enshrined.

Moreover, since this exhibition is titled "The New Quilters: Quiltmaking as an
Art Form," there are many examples of innovative design that defy tradition.
Some are appliqued with Mylar, some are pierced, some are machine-made in
astonishingly intricate techniques and some are designed from photo transfers.
Color is used with painterly finesse.

Of the master quilters who are exhibiting, 4 are from Westchester, 12 from New
York City, 3 are New Jerseyans and 1 each is from Ohio and Israel.

On April 30 at 4 P.M. Patricia Malarcher, one of the exhibitors, will deliver a
lecture on "Breaking Patterns: Creative Directions in Quiltmaking." Tickets at
$5 may be purchased at the door.

The gallery, at 51 Milton Road, is open Monday through Friday from 9:30 A.M. to
12:30 P.M. and from 1:30 to 5 P.M. and Saturday from 1 to 4 P.M. It will be
closed this Friday and Saturday. Admission is free, and the phone number for
more information is 967-0700.

BOOKS, AUTHORS, LUNCH

The Westchester Library System will hold its yearly Book and Author Luncheon
highlighting National Library Week on Tuesday at noon at Abigail Kirsch's Tappan
Hill in Tarrytown.

Benjamin Cheever, the novelist, Nancy Taylor Rosenberg, author of legal
thrillers and Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, author and book reviewer, will discuss
their work.

Mr. Cheever will give a sneak preview of an unpublished novel, reading some
excerpts from it, and the latest published novels of Ms. Rosenberg and Mr.
Lehmann-Haupt will be the focus of their talks. Tickets are $35, or $55
including membership in Advocates of the Westchester Library System and a gift
book. Call 592-8214, extension 226 or 227 on Monday for reservations or more
information.

THEATER OF THE DEAF

The unusual approach to theater employed by the National Theater of the Deaf, an
internationally recognized group based in Chester, Conn., will be explained in a
workshop, lecture and demonstration at Manhattanville College on Wednesday from
3 to 5 P.M. in the Kennedy Gymnasium dance studio.

Using a combination of sign and spoken language the troupe has enabled
hearing-impaired and hearing audiences to enjoy plays, poetry and literature
together. The workshop consists of theater games, improvisation, mime and
exercises that open new vistas of understanding of the physical language of the
deaf.

Admission is $5, free to students. The college is at 2900 Purchase Street, Route
120 in Purchase. Call 694-220 for more information.

ON EQUALITY

"Is Equality Attainable?" a lecture about opposing American approaches to
policies governing welfare, affirmative action, quotas, school financing,
women's liberation, taxes and political correctness, will be delivered by
Stanley Feingold today at 3 P.M. in the Academic Arts Building of Westchester
Community College in Valhalla. Admission to the talk and a reception afterward
are free.

Professor Feingold holds the Distinguished Chair of Business and Public Policy
at the college, and he is an associate professor in the department of behavioral
and social sciences.

A teacher of political science for 40 years, his career has included positions
at Columbia University, the University of California at Los Angeles and City
College of New York. For more information call the events phone, 785-6700.

EASTER EGG HUNT

Young children who are taken to the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx today
from 1 to 4 P.M. should have a very good time indeed, hunting for Easter eggs
among the daffodils and on the Conservatory lawn, seeking Elizabeth, the Easter
bunny, in her maze and listening to stories about Elizabeth and her friends, two
Canada geese.

The eggs will be stuffed with candy and special eggs will contain tickets to be
exchanged for spring bulbs, which the children will plant in pots to take home.
Three eggs will have grand prize tickets inside -- large baskets filled with
treats.

Additional diversions include rides on the Bunny Tram, photo- taking with
cutouts of Elizabeth, hands-on gardening, forest and pond exploration and a Gala
Bunny Hop at Conservatory Plaza.

Admission is $3 for adults, $2 for people 62 and older, students and children 6
through 15. Children younger than 6 are admitted free. The Botanical Garden is
at 200th Street and Southern Boulevard. Call (718) 817-8700 Tuesdays through
Sundays for more information or directions.

BAROQUE COMPOSERS

Some of the lesser known Baroque composers of the late 17th and early 18th
century will be discussed by Richard Kapp in his "Lecture With Music" on Monday
at 8:15 in the Hoff-Barthelson Music School auditorium, 25 School Lane, in
Scarsdale.

Mr. Kapp, director of the Philharmonia Virtuosi, calls his talk "Baroque
Curiosities," focusing on an unexpected diversity of expression outside the
celebrated parameters of Baroque music exemplified by Bach, Handel, Vivaldi and
Corelli among others.

Heinrich Biber, Carl Fasch, Pietro Locatelli and Jan Zelenka are some of the
composers he will talk about. Admission is $15 for the lecture and a reception
afterward. Call 723-1169 for reservations or more information.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 15, 1995, Saturday

CORRECTION:

A listing of Easter events in Weekend yesterday and a report in the Guide column
in the Westchester Weekly last Sunday gave incorrect dates and imprecise times
for the New York Botanical Garden egg hunt. The celebration is today on the
Conservatory Lawn of the Garden, Southern Boulevard and 200th Street, the Bronx.
Events last from 1 to 4 P.M.; the egg hunt begins about 2.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey Fights to Protect Democracy

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


To the Editor:

"Washington and the Kurds" (editorial, April 4) is, unfortunately, more
concerned with when Turkish armed forces will withdraw from northern Iraq than
the merits of the problem confronting Turkey and the real and justified motives
of the operation. Unfortunately, it was perhaps the fault of Turkish officials
that the reasons and targets for the operation were not stated clearly and
unequivocally at the start. But to assume that a force of 35,000 was sent into
northern Iraq just to kill the terrorists is an insult to the ability of the
Turkish General Staff. This exercise's success should not be measured in Vietnam
-like body counts.

Turkey earnestly wants to solve the so-called Kurdish problem by making the
southeast safe for democracy and economic progress.  But the murderous
activities of the Kurdish Workers Party, or P.K.K., terrorists, who intimidate
the population by killing women, children and teachers and by destroying heavy
machinery, have made peaceful progress impossible.

That terrorists have resorted to hit-and-run tactics with impunity -- using the
northern Iraq region, where there was a virtual vacuum of authority as a safe
haven and logistical base -- has frustrated the efforts to eradicate P.K.K.
terrorism in Turkey. It was imperative that Turkey end this situation by
destroying the weapons and ammunition dumps of the P.K.K. and establishing a
defensible buffer zone outside its borders.

If Turkey is now threatened by the unstable situation in northern Iraq, this is
not Turkey's fault; the United States and Western powers should take the blame
for not finishing the job after the Persian Gulf war.

You say that no one in Washington has figured out how to deal with the Kurdish
problem. We know better how to deal with it because it is a problem that
involves the survival of our nation and the integrity of our country.

ALTEMUR KILIC
Istanbul, Turkey, April 6, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Haiti Murder Investigation: Avenues With Few Answers

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2191 words

DATELINE: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti, April 10


Two weeks after the assassination of a prominent right-wing critic of President
Jean-Bertrand Aristide caused strains with Washington over accusations that the
Interior Minister may have been involved, investigators say they are still in
the dark about who did it.

This much is certain: The white Subaru in which the victim, Mireille Durocher
Bertin, was riding was blocked on a busy street in broad daylight. Gunmen in a
red Mitsubishi jeep shot up the front tire on the driver's side, got out and
raked the windshield with automatic weapons, firing from both sides of the car.
Then they disappeared.

And that, despite a Federal Bureau of Investigation inquiry ordered by President
Clinton, is probably all that will be known for sure about the killing of Mrs.
Durocher Bertin, a 35-year-old lawyer who became familiar to American television
audiences last fall defending the former military Government. It is not even
clear that Mrs. Durocher Bertin was the killers' target; her driver, a reputed
drug trafficker, was reportedly shot many more times than she was.

"I suspect we're not going to get anywhere," said an official familiar with the
F.B.I. investigation. "We have no information that will explain the killing."

The shooting, on March 28, opened a tiny, clouded window into this tormented
land.

"There is no doubt that President Aristide's reputation has been severely
blemished," said a prominent intellectual critical of the old order. "The
killing is a major blow to President Aristide -- and to President Clinton."

The killing has become a rallying point for members of the old ruling elite, who
flocked to Mrs. Durocher Bertin's funeral, attributing the shooting to President
Aristide's supporters, saying it proved how dangerous they are.

For the Aristide Government, which denies involvement, the killing was a
profound embarrassment, coming on the eve of a visit by President Clinton, and a
source of friction with the United States over reports linking the Haitian
Interior Minister, Brig. Gen. Mondesir Beaubrun, to the slaying.

With the approach of parliamentary elections, which were delayed today from June
4 until June 25, tension, disorder and intrigue are growing here. Crime is on
the rise, with killings nearly nightly, many the work of unemployed soldiers and
gunmen, some in robberies, others possibly political.

Prominent figures of the old order, like former Mayor Franck Romain of
Port-au-Prince, are regularly on the radio, vowing to return to power. While the
imposing white National Palace was polished to a sparkle for Mr. Clinton's
visit, which marked the turnover of the American military presence to the United
Nations, there is discord between President Aristide and the Cabinet of Prime
Minister Smarck Michel and little change in the overwhelming poverty and misery
afflicting some 95 percent of Haiti's seven million people.

The shooting came after the American military thought it had uncovered and
foiled a plot to kill Mrs. Durocher Bertin, reportedly at the behest of General
Beaubrun, by arresting six people.

American officials warned the Haitian Government of the suspected plot, but
President Aristide has since resisted American pressure to suspend or dismiss
General Beaubrun while the investigations continue. The initial six accused
plotters were in custody at the time of the shooting, Haitian and American
officials said.

One of the accused plotters has now told Haitian police and prosecutors that the
next target was to come from the other end of the political spectrum: Leslie
Delatour, the new governor of the Central Bank, who has angered the small group
of mulatto families who run the economy by threatening to make them pay taxes
and break up their Government-allotted monopolies.

The Attack
Killers' Target Open to Question

Not only is it not known who ordered the shooting and why, it is not even
certain that Mrs. Durocher Bertin was the primary or actual target. The driver,
Eugene (Junior) Baillergeau -- a private pilot, reputed drug trafficker and a
client of Mrs. Durocher Bertin -- was shot many more times than she was, said an
official familiar with the autopsy, which has not yet been released.

The bullet-riddled Subaru indicates the ferocity of the assault, particularly on
Mr. Baillergeau, and its efficiency. There were two spaced single shots fired
from each side of the hood into the motor, presumably to disable the car.

Maj. Dany Toussaint, who heads the small interim Haitian Police Force and has
detailed his own investigative team to the case, outlined the half dozen or more
possibilities that, singly or in some combination, American and Haitian
officials are examining as possible motives.

He said these would include whether there was one plot, with a second crew of
gunmen not among those arrested, or an entirely separate operation, possibly
taking advantage of the widespread knowledge of the arrests in the first plot.
Was the first plot really what it seemed? If it was a settling of old scores,
what were they? If it was political, was it to rid Mr. Aristide of an enemy, or
to embarrass him? Could it have involved infighting among the right?

There could be other hidden factors, he said, even domestic discord. Not to be
ignored, he emphasized, were possible connections with the drug trade, in which
Colombian operatives have gained a strong foothold here during the period of
military rule and the embargo.

Given Mr. Baillergeau's reputation for drug involvement and known association
with illicit business circles close to the former military Government, many of
whose members have themselves become deeply involved in drugs and smuggling, and
the brutal efficiency of the shooting, several Government officials suggested
that some kind of internal drug conflict played a role.

"To tell you frankly, I underestimated the extent of drugs and drug money in
Haiti," said Patrick Elie, a member of Mr. Aristide's inner cabinet who
concentrates on drug matters. "Coming back here after three years of exile, I'm
just scared of what I see. There's not enough in this country to steal to
explain the wealth in certain quarters."

The Detained
Two Brothers, Many Theories

The chain of events began on March 19 when, American officials say, Claude
Douge, an interpreter for the United States Army, told them of a plot, involving
two brothers, Patrick and Eddy Moise, to assassinate Mrs. Durocher Bertin and
produced Uzi assault rifles he said they had been given.

The Moise brothers were arrested along with two other men in a gray Isuzu
Trooper registered to the Interior Ministry, carrying General Beaubrun's phone
number; a business card of Gen. Joseph Cherubin, President Aristide's military
adviser who is Mr. Beaubrun's patron, and a list of eight anti-Aristide lawyers,
including Mrs. Durocher Bertin, American investigators said.

Mr. Douge and his wife, both being held as suspects in the plot, told
investigators they understood Patrick Moise was being "tested" by the Interior
Ministry and could be rewarded with a post as an intelligence department head
and leader of a "popular movement." Investigators said one of those arrested,
Michelet Nicholas, said he saw the Interior Minister give Mr. Moise the keys to
the Isuzu.

The Moise brothers, along with the others, are ostensibly members of a far-left,
pro-Libyan, anti-American group called the United Militant Front. But Major
Toussaint and other Haitian officials said that in fact they were violent
gangsters who acted in the past as provocateurs on behalf of the military.

They pointed out that the brothers walked away without punishment from an
occupation of the Canadian Embassy in 1992, at a time when Aristide backers were
being shot and left in the street.

The General
A Military Man With a Temper

General Beaubrun is said to owe his appointment as Interior Minister, which used
to control the army but is now largely vestigial, primarily to his military
academy classmate, General Cherubin. A hot-tempered gambler, he had run afoul of
one of the powerful coup leaders, Col. Michel Francois, people knowledgeable
about the military said, when he tried to finish a fight he had gotten into with
a man at El Rancho Casino by ordering the man released from the Petionville
jail, controlled by Colonel Francois, into his own custody.

Pushed out of his command, he was thus regarded as relatively unconnected to
corruption. After Mr. Aristide was returned to power last fall, General Beaubrun
became one of the five colonels who vetted the army and police force to see who
could stay on. He has produced lists of security threats, many of whom seem to
have crossed him in the past, including the former Petionville commander, Maj.
Patrick Bastien, whom he has sent to jail.

Last December, when soldiers were protesting for back pay, General Beaubrun
opened fire through his office door, killing two guards.

"He was very nasty, unnecessarily so," Raymond W. Kelly, the former New York
City Police Commissioner, who tried to mediate the dispute, said of the
Minister.

Six days before Mrs. Durocher Bertin was killed, Maj. Gen. George Fisher of the
United States Army wrote to Justice Minister Jean-Joseph Exume, informing him of
the suspected plot, the arrests and the reported involvement of the Interior
Minister. Mr. Exume says he warned Mrs. Durocher Bertin and offered protection,
but she declined.

An attractive woman, so energetic and vivacious that she often seemed to eclipse
her husband, John, a tall, handsome pilot, Mrs. Durocher Bertin did not seem
particularly worried, Mr. Exume recalled in an interview. Indeed, she dropped by
his office on Friday, March 24, with papers to register her new opposition
political party.

In the couple's massive stone house in the hills high above the city, John
Bertin recalled it differently.  "I, as head of the family, was not notified,"
he said stiffly, and added that a phone call from the Justice Minister to his
wife told her only not to worry and did not warn of the plot.

Nevertheless, he said, he was sufficiently worried in general to plan to take
the family to the Dominican Republic on Tuesday, March 28, the day his wife was
killed.

He said he also fretted that his wife was driving with Mr. Baillergeau, an old
friend and sometime colleague since their days at flight school near Miami, whom
she was representing in a dispute over damages to his plane by American soldiers
at the airport. He feared that Mr. Baillergeau was not always alert, he said,
and he kept calling on the radio and rushing through errands to try to catch up
with them.

The Husband
At the Scene, Apparent Calm

Eddy Pierre, a Bronx-raised Vietnam veteran, was standing in front of his
mother's house on Avenue Martin Luther King, about 3:45 that afternoon when he
noticed a white taxi with several rifle-carrying men in it parked jutting into
the street. A white Subaru headed toward the airport suddenly spun around,
turning back toward town, but was cut off by the red jeep and the men who piled
out shooting. At that point, Mr. Pierre dived for cover.

"The daylight aspect of this was most brazen," said Mr. Kelly, whose
international police monitors had turned over control of the area to the United
Nations at noon. "It was so skillfully planned."

Mr. Bertin recalled that he was one of the first people to arrive on the scene.
As a huge crowd gathered, many were struck by his apparent calm under the
circumstances. The initial United Nations police report, a person who has seen
it said, noted that one of the first things he did was to reach in the back of
the car, saying he was looking for a radio or cellular phone.

The difficulty for the F.B.I. is that the ballistic and forensic tests will
show, essentially, that a lot of bullets were pumped into the car and its
passengers. But solving such crimes, experienced officers say, usually depends
on criminal informants and canvassing of the neighborhood.

"Technically, these guys are the best in the world; they can tell you if a
shooter is left-handed," said an official involved in the case. "But unless we
find somebody who says, 'I saw the killers, they are these people,' we won't get
to the bottom of it."

The killings have left Haiti fearful. In the Presidential Palace the mood is
grim, and a close aide to Mr. Aristide said: "The very killers operating under
the dictatorship are back at it. Why? They stand to gain both politically and
materially if they are able to destabilize the country."

In well-to-do Petionville, hundreds of people lined up outside St. Pierre's
Church for the funeral last week and the heavy four-wheel-drive cars favored by
the wealthy blocked the streets. There were three former heads of state in the
flower-filled church, along with a host of members of the old Parliament,
military officers and lawyers in black robes.

The Haitian national anthem rang out and two Roman Catholic bishops, Louis
Kebreau and Joseph Lafontant, officiated at the Mass, declaring that Mrs.
Durocher Bertin had been "crucified like Christ."

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mireille Durocher Bertin, a critic of President Jean-Bertrand
Aristide, was slain last month.; Mourners grieved at Mireille Durocher Bertin's
coffin at her funeral in Port-au-Prince on April 3. (Photographs by Associated
Press) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 11, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

International Briefs;
In Brief

SECTION: Section D;  Page 10;  Column 6;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 112 words



* A joint venture between the Mitsubishi Corporation and Perusahaan Otomobil
Nasional Berhad of Malaysia has received permission to assemble light trucks in
Vietnam. The venture, the Vinastar Motors Corporation, is building a plant near
Hanoi and expects to begin production next month, assembling up to 360 trucks a
year from imported parts.

* GEC Alsthom has won a contract worth as much as $792 million to lease 106
trains to the London subway system for its Northern Line. GEC Alsthom is a joint
venture of Alcatel Alsthom S.A. of France and the General Electric Company of
Britain,which is not related to the General Electric Company of the United
States.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

New Prisons Cast Shadow Over Higher Education

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1374 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif.


The hulking shape of San Quentin is not quite visible from the heights of the
University of California campus on the other side of San Francisco Bay. But the
prison has begun to loom ominously in the minds of professors and students here
as they have come to believe that California's binge of prison building is being
financed at the expense of the state's proud public university system.

This year, for the first time, California will spend more on prisons than for
its two university systems, the University of California and the California
state universities, according to Geoffrey Long, the chief consultant to the
State Assembly's Budget Committee.

It is the culmination of a trend that has seen spending on prisons climb to 9.9
percent of the budget this year, from 2 percent in 1980, while spending on
higher education has shrunk to 9.5 percent from 12.6 percent in 1980. In the
last 15 years, the number of inmates in California prisons has increased from
23,511 to 126,140, and the state has built 17 new prisons, the largest prison
construction program in the nation's history, said Franklin Zimring, director of
the Earl Warren Legal Institute at Berkeley.

With California's tough new "three strikes and you're out" law beginning to take
effect, spending on prisons is expected to increase even more rapidly. The state
estimates that with the three-strikes law it will need 15 more prisons by the
year 2000, at a cost of $4.5 billion, just to stay at the current 182 percent of
capacity, said Craig Brown, the under secretary of the Youth and Adult
Correctional Agency.

A Rand Corporation study has projected that if the three-strikes law is fully
implemented, by the year 2002 the Department of Corrections will consume 18
percent of the state budget, with only 1 percent left for universities. The new
law mandates a prison sentence of 25 years to life for third-time offenders.

A spokesman for Gov. Pete Wilson, an ardent supporter of prison construction and
the three-strikes law, blamed California's economic slump, which has lowered
state revenue, for the drop in spending on higher education. But the spokesman,
Paul Kranhold, said that within budgetary limits "the Governor makes no
apologies for making public safety a top priority."

The clash between spending for prisons and education is taking place in many
states around the country.

"Higher education is the prime cash cow for state budgets," said Steven D. Gold,
director of the Center for the Study of the States, an Albany-based research arm
of the State University of New York that studies state programs and finances.
"There are few patterns that are universal, but this comes as close to being
universal as any in the 1990's."

In a survey of spending from 1990 to 1993 in six states, including California,
Mr. Gold found the same "shift in resources, from the loser, higher education,
to the winner, corrections." The other states were Connecticut, Florida,
Massachusetts, Michigan and Minnesota. The results are to be published this
month in "The Fiscal Crisis of the States" (Georgetown University Press).

Under Gov. George E. Pataki's proposed new budget for New York, spending for
higher education will be cut; spending for prisons is the only part of the
budget that is being spared, Mr. Gold said.

"The governors are making a choice, corrections uber alles," Mr. Gold said.
"They think that's what the public wants. But the public doesn't understand the
fiscal price tag that is hidden," which is less higher education and,
ultimately, a less highly trained work force.

Public universities are a particularly convenient target, he said, because "if
you substitute tuition increases for state tax dollars, it cushions the blow."

Malcolm Feeley, a professor of law and associate dean of the Boalt Hall School
of Law at Berkeley, called the tradeoff shortsighted. "Silicon Valley and
California's big defense industry didn't just happen because of the warm
weather," he said. "They were supported by a world-class public education system
that was practically free."

Many of Berkeley's faculty members believe there is a direct connection between
the increase in spending for prisons and the decrease in support for the state's
universities because of California's tightly restricted budgetary system.
Proposition 13, established by a referendum approved by the state's voters in
1978, requires that state income taxes cannot be raised without a two-thirds
vote of the Legislature.

Another referendum, passed in 1988, fixed the amount the state must spend for
public education from kindergarten through community college. And Federal
mandates have set spending levels for other programs, including Medicare.

These laws have resulted in prisons and higher education competing for an
ever-shrinking piece of the budget pie.

Mr. Kranhold, the spokesman for Governor Wilson, said that as California's
economy improved, the Governor would put more money into the universities. He
added that while annual student fees to attend the University of California have
risen several hundred percent in the last decade, they are still only $4,111, a
bargain price for an education at a great university.

Mr. Kranhold also said that the budgetary process is too complex to trace the
cutbacks in California's funds for higher education directly to the increase in
spending for prisons. "The correlation is just not that direct," he said. "I
don't think there is a relationship."

But Mr. Gold, of the Center for the Study of the States, said, "In this case,
where one has been shrinking and the other has been growing and the overall
state budget has not grown, the arithmetic tells the tale."

A few states have started trying to control prison construction costs. Last
October, for example, North Carolina began an experiment under which judges
balance prison sentences with available cells, making the punishment fit the
state budget.

According to Rob Lubitz, the executive director of the North Carolina Sentencing
Commission, the state acted after finding that even though it had spent $550
million on building new prisons since 1985, it still had to release many inmates
early because legislators kept introducing tough sentencing bills.

There has been relatively little public debate about the cost of tougher
sentencing in California. The state's legislators, spurred by a wave of widely
publicized murders, have approved 1,100 new anti-crime laws in the last 15
years, topped by the three-strikes law last year.

But the same voters who have demanded tougher justice have repeatedly turned
down Governor Wilson's requests for billions of dollars in state bonds for new
prisons over the last two years.

In his budget for the next fiscal year, Mr. Wilson is asking the Legislature to
approve the sale of $2 billion in lease revenue bonds for prison construction.
Unlike general obligation bonds, lease revenue bonds are not subject to voter
approval and carry a higher interest rate.

The legislators rejected a similar request last year. But even if they now
agreed to the bonds, it is unlikely that the corrections agency could build all
the prisons in the time needed, according to an estimate by Elizabeth Hill, head
of the Legislative Analyst's Office, the Legislature's nonpartisan research arm.
It takes four years to plan and build a new prison, she said.

As an emergency measure, the Governor is asking for $167 million to provide new
beds in some older prisons, including San Quentin.

In the long run, Mr. Long said, overcrowding in the state's prisons may become
so bad that the Federal courts will take them over. Other experts predict that
the three-strikes law is so costly it will never be put into effect completely.

That may be the good news in a state where, according to corrections agency
predictions, there will be 401,000 convicts by the year 2027, when the prison
population peaks --more than there are now in all of Western Europe, Australia,
Canada, Japan and New Zealand combined.

Tom Hayden, a Democratic State Senator from Santa Monica, said he believed
California's prison-building binge was "another Vietnam moral quagmire in the
making, only worse." In Vietnam, he said, "at least you could withdraw."


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: San Quentin Prison, with the Berkeley Hills in the distance.
Some people say California is in the midst of a prison-building binge that is
being financed at the expense of the state's university system. (Jim Wilson/The
New York Times)

Graph: "LEDGER: Comparing Corrections and Education"

Gov. Pete Wilson's proposed budget for 1995-96 would allocate $4 billion for
spending on the University of Califonia and the Califonia State University
systems. Geoffrey Long, chief consultant to the Assembly Budget Committee, said
that for the first time, spending on prisons exceeds that on higher education.
Graph tracks spending on higher education (excluding spending on community
colleges) and correcctions for the fiscal years running from 1980-81 through
1995-96. (Source: California Governor's office)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Investments

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 6;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

DATELINE: HANOI, April 11


The Vietnamese Government approved $1.9 billion in foreign investments during
the first quarter of the year, almost triple the value of the ventures and
projects licensed in the corresponding period of 1994. The increase, reported
today by the State Committee for Cooperation and Investment, can be partly
attributed to American investment after the United States ended its 19-year
economic embargo against Vietnam in February 1994. The United States became
Vietnam's eighth-largest investor last month, with 33 licensed ventures worth
$525 million, the report said. Taiwan remained the largest source of foreign
investment.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Mr. McNamara's War

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


Comes now Robert McNamara with the announcement that he has in the fullness of
time grasped realities that seemed readily apparent to millions of Americans
throughout the Vietnam War. At the time, he appeared to be helping an obsessed
President prosecute a war of no real consequence to the security of the United
States. Millions of loyal citizens concluded that the war was a militarily
unnecessary and politically futile effort to prop up a corrupt Government that
could neither reform nor defend itself.

Through all the bloody years, those were the facts as they appeared on the
surface. Therefore, only one argument could be advanced to clear President
Johnson and Mr. McNamara, his Secretary of Defense, of the charge of wasting
lives atrociously. That was the theory that they possessed superior knowledge,
not available to the public, that the collapse of South Vietnam would lead to
regional and perhaps world domination by the Communists; and moreover, that
their superior knowledge was so compelling it rendered unreliable and untrue the
apparent facts available to even the most expert opponents of the war.

With a few throwaway lines in his new book, "In Retrospect," Mr. McNamara admits
that such knowledge never existed. Indeed, as they made the fateful first steps
toward heavier fighting in late 1963 and 1964, Mr. Johnson and his Cabinet "had
not truly investigated what was essentially at stake and important to us." As
for testing their public position that only a wider war would avail in the
circumstances, "We never stopped to explore fully whether there were other
routes to our destination."

Such sentences break the heart while making clear that Mr. McNamara must not
escape the lasting moral condemnation of his countrymen.

Mr. McNamara wants us to know that he, too, realized by 1967 that the dissidents
were right, that the war had to be stopped to avoid "a major national disaster."
Even so, he wants us to grant that his delicate sense of protocol excused him
from any obligation to join the national debate over whether American troops
should continue to die at the rate of hundreds per week in a war he knew to be
futile. Mr. McNamara believes that retired cabinet members should not criticize
the Presidents they served no matter how much the American people need to know
the truth. In Mr. McNamara's view, the President can never become so steeped in
a misguided war that patriotic duty would compel a statement.

Perhaps the only value of "In Retrospect" is to remind us never to forget that
these were men who in the full hubristic glow of their power would not listen to
logical warning or ethical appeal. When senior figures talked sense to Mr.
Johnson and Mr. McNamara, they were ignored or dismissed from government. When
young people in the ranks brought that message, they were court-martialed. When
young people in the streets shouted it, they were hounded from the country.

It is important to remember how fate dispensed rewards and punishment for Mr.
McNamara's thousands of days of error. Three million Vietnamese died.
Fifty-eight thousand Americans got to come home in body bags. Mr. McNamara,
while tormented by his role in the war, got a sinecure at the World Bank and
summers at the Vineyard.

So much has changed since those horrendous times. The nation has belatedly
recognized the heroism of the American troops who served in good faith because
they, in their innocence, could not fathom the mendacity of their elders. But
another set of heroes -- the thousands of students who returned the nation to
sanity by chanting, "Hell, no, we won't go" -- is under renewed attack from a
band of politicians who sat out the war on student or family deferments. In that
sense we are still living in the wreckage created by the Cabinet on which Mr.
McNamara served.

His regret cannot be huge enough to balance the books for our dead soldiers. The
ghosts of those unlived lives circle close around Mr. McNamara. Surely he must
in every quiet and prosperous moment hear the ceaseless whispers of those poor
boys in the infantry, dying in the tall grass, platoon by platoon, for no
purpose. What he took from them cannot be repaid by prime-time apology and stale
tears, three decades late.

Mr. McNamara says he weeps easily and has strong feelings when he visits the
Vietnam Memorial. But he says he will not speak of those feelings. Yet someone
must, for that black wall is wide with the names of people who died in a war
that he did not, at first, carefully research or, in the end, believe to be
necessary.


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Guatemala Makes Progress Toward Peace;
Killing Machine

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 252 words


To the Editor:

"Guatemala's War: Ideology Is the Latest Excuse" (Week in Review, April 9) is
right to trace the origins of Guatemalan Army persecution of the indigenous
population to the "liberal revolution" of 1871.

But by placing the wars since 1954 solely within that context -- the implication
being that the United States role has been secondary -- you leave out a crucial
element of the post1954 period.

Until the late 1960's the Guatemalan Army did not have the counterinsurgency
training or the fierce anti-Communist obsession that has made it into the
killing machine it became. That training and that mentality came from United
States military advisers (including hundreds of Green Berets) during 1966-68, in
Latin America's first Vietnam-style counterinsurgency war.

United States advisers, by their own acknowledgment, also helped form
Guatemala's death squads, the first in Latin America. United States support for
the Guatemalan military has continued during subsequent years in forms overt and
covert.

It is for this reason that our Government has an obligation to the Guatemalan
people -- and a historic opportunity -- to end its indecent liaisons with that
killing machine and to press for full demilitarization within current peace
negotiations to end Guatemala's 35-year civil war.

SUSANNE JONAS
Santa Cruz, Calif., April 9, 1995
The writer, author of "The Battle for Guatemala: Rebels, Death Squads and U.S.
Power" (1991), teaches at the University of California.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Paul Akst, 83, Colonel Who Led New York's Draft Boards, Dies

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 402 words


Col. Paul Akst, who administered the military draft in New York City for many
years, including during the Vietnam War, died last Saturday at his winter home
in Palm Beach, Fla. A resident of Manhattan, he was 83.

He died after a lengthy illness, his family said.

Colonel Akst, an Air Force officer, was placed in charge of registration in the
city in 1948, when local draft boards were reactivated after World War II. It
was a hectic period as tens of thousands of men between 18 and 25 crowded the
city's high schools to fill out forms for classification and pre-induction
physicals.

Then, there was little need for draftees. The city's quota, set in Washington,
was generally filled by men enlisting on their own.

Colonel Akst advanced from head of Manpower and Operations to Director of
Selective Service for the city in 1955. The Presidential appointment came at the
recommendation of Gov. W. Averell Harriman.

In the 1960's, the Vietnam War and President Lyndon B. Johnson's orders for
double the recruitments brought considerable stress to the colonel's task. Many
college campuses were wracked by anti-war demonstrations. At one point,
administrators at New York University counseled students how to avoid 1A status
and stay out of Vietnam.

Draft evasion spread among young men who dreaded the trip downtown to 39
Whitehall Street for their physical exams and sought a medical "out." As Colonel
Akst observed in 1970, "the fact is that people want to fail and find ways to do
it."

Radicals, including black-power militants, openly declared their defiance.
Vandals broke into local boards in search of draft records.

Once Washington decided to pull out of Vietnam, the draft was abolished. And
draft boards shut down.

Colonel Akst retired in 1980.

He was born on the Lower East Side of Manhattan and graduated from St. John's
University. He received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School. He practiced law
for six years before enlisting as an Army private in 1941.

He was commissioned and served in England as a legal officer and trial judge
advocate. Immediately after the war, he was an administrative judge for the
Veterans Administration.

Colonel Akst is survived by his wife of 48 years, Paula Brown Akst; two sons,
Mark, of Pompano Beach, Fla., and George, of Scarsdale, N.Y.; three brothers,
Mack, of Miami, Robert, of Manhattan, and Ted, of Brooklyn, and three
grandchildren.

NAME: Paul Akst

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
McNamara Concedes: 'We Were Wrong'

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words



IN RETROSPECT
The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam
By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark
Illustrated. 414 pages. Times Books. $27.50.

As Robert S. McNamara concedes at the end of his new book, "In Retrospect: The
Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," some people still believe that the heavy costs
of American involvement in Vietnam were worthwhile. Such people, Mr. McNamara
writes, "conclude that without U.S. intervention in Vietnam, Communist hegemony
-- both Soviet and Chinese -- would have spread farther through South and East
Asia to include control of Indonesia, Thailand and possibly India."

But Mr. McNamara, who served Presidents Kennedy and Johnson as Secretary of
Defense from 1961 until early in 1968, does not agree. He says the country could
and should have withdrawn from Vietnam "in late 1963 amid the turmoil following"
the assassination of South Vietnam's President, Ngo Dinh Diem, "or in late 1964
or early 1965 in the face of increasing political and military weakness," or on
several later occasions. Not only would our allies have understood, he adds, but
we might even have "improved our credibility by withdrawing from Vietnam and
saving our strength for more defensible stands elsewhere."

That the United States did not get out cost a terrible price in lives, in damage
to the American economy and, most significantly to Mr. McNamara, in the
shattering of our "political unity." In short, he says that "we were wrong,
terribly wrong." He therefore decided to write a book that would face his own
and his colleagues' mistakes. He would be hard on everyone. But his purpose
would not be so much to point fingers as to dispel the cynicism that he believes
Vietnam helped engender.  For he still is convinced that the war was fought with
good and honorable motives. And by identifying both the motives and the errors,
he might help to restore faith in our leaders.

As it turns out, he is only partly successful in his attempt to clear the air.
He makes good sense when defining the basic causes of the failure.  These he
sums up in familiar enough terms: a view of Communism as monolithic, an anxious
outlook aggravated by Cuba and Berlin, an absence of experts on the Far East
caused by the purge of the China specialists in the McCarthy era, and perhaps
most fundamentally, the contradiction, never resolved, of looking upon South
Vietnam as both the bulwark of Southeast Asia and a country that needed to be
trained to defend itself.

Yet in detailing how these flaws manifested themselves he is not so consistently
lucid. On some matters he is outspoken. For instance, he blames the law of
unintended consequences for the way the decision to bomb led to a need for
ground troops to defend the airfields, and then more and more ground troops as
the war on the ground expanded. He defends Gen. William S. Westmoreland against
the accusation brought by a CBS Reports documentary, "The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception," alleging, as he puts it, "that Westy ordered his
intelligence officers knowingly to underestimate enemy strength in order to
bolster his claims of military progress." And he faults President Johnson for
failing to be more forthright with the American public about the growing expense
of the war. He attributes this failure to Johnson's worthy desire to keep his
Great Society programs on track.

Elsewhere, however, Mr. McNamara seems less lucid on why and how things went
wrong. On the one hand, he wrings his hands over the deaths of President Diem
and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu, as if he were somehow at fault; on the other hand
he is critical of Roger Hilsman Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Far
Eastern Affairs, and Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge for their roles in promoting
the coup against the Diems. On the one hand, he blames himself for not forcing
the debate on bombing out into the open; on the other hand he keeps pointing an
accusing finger at the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

And concerning his eventual departure from the Johnson Administration over his
loss of belief in the war, he both professes his love for Johnson and his
loyalty to him and faults the President for not following his advice.

Part of the trouble lies in Mr. McNamara's unevenness of tone.  Sometimes he is
official in his prose style, as when he resorts to the passive voice in
discussing the coup against the Diems, "Neither question received an adequate
answer, and Lodge was not given instructions to meet Diem." Putting the matter
this way leaves no one in particular at fault. At other times he is
disconcertingly personal, as when he blames himself for not talking things out
with his family: "at moments like this I often turn inward instead -- it is a
grave weakness."

At still other times he seems caught bizarrely in between the official and the
personal, as, for instance, when he reports in his official voice how he tried
to demonstrate for Eunice Shriver the function of "the fountain pen-like
tear-gas dispenser" that was stored in the rear compartment of his limousine: "I
rolled the window down a bit, held the dispenser up to it, and pressed. Because
we were moving so fast, there was a vacuum, which drew the fumes into the car.
Eunice -- who planned to make a speech" at the Wardman Park Hotel -- "began
choking and screaming. I had incapacitated her by the time we arrived."

One begins to suspect the presence of a highly complex code in these pages, the
deciphering of which would require the collaboration of scholars, cryptographers
and psychoanalysts. Certain points in the book come across like thunderclaps,
like the author's clear preference for President Kennedy, who, he believes,
would have pulled out of Vietnam had he lived, over President Johnson, whom he
faults for not allowing open discussion of Vietnam policy among his senior
advisers.

Other points pop like firecrackers, like the author's criticism of Walt Rostow,
McGeorge Bundy's successor as national security adviser, for tending "to be
skeptical of any report that failed to indicate we were making progress." But
because Mr. McNamara's contradictions leave one in the dark about so much of
what he really thinks, one ends up feeling, if not precisely cynicism, then a
residue of confusion about what went wrong in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert S. McNamara (Diana Walker/Times Books)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 492 words


To the Editor:

In a strong attack on Robert S. McNamara's account of the Vietnam years, "In
Retrospect," your April 12 lead editorial, "Mr. McNamara's War," insists that
"Mr. McNamara must not escape the lasting moral condemnation of his countrymen."

Let it also be noted, however, that it is a great and almost unprecedented moral
achievement for a man in public life to have offered such an honest accounting
of how people like himself, with initially good intentions, became enmeshed in
structures of their own creation from which it was finally impossible to escape.
Most public servants' memoirs turn out to be self-serving exercises in which
their political decisions are retrospectively interpreted in the best possible
light.

Not so with Robert McNamara, who makes clear that his own activities in the
public sphere were activities for which he now feels deep remorse.

"What we did," he concludes, "was terribly, terribly wrong."

His intention is not to justify his political decisions but to expose them at
whatever personal cost, to let the record hang out publicly, hoping that the
lessons learned too late in the Vietnamese struggle can be appropriated to avoid
similar mistakes in the future. All honor, therefore, to Mr. McNamara for having
set a pattern virtually unknown in our nation's public life.

We are left with the question: What can be done with our mistakes? In some
cases, overt punishment follows, and an individual is held to have paid his debt
to society. In many cases, including Robert McNamara's, the punishment is
covert, self-inflicted and lacerating to a degree no one else can ever measure;
whatever evils have been done cannot be undone, nor can the dead be returned to
us.

But there is something else that can be done with past mistakes, and that is to
use them in such a way that the errors of the past do not become the temptations
of the future. We can at least learn what not to do next time, and that is a
specific moral gain.

This is clearly what motivated Robert McNamara to bare his soul in such
unprecedented fashion. His own words are important:

"I want Americans to understand why we made the mistakes we did and to learn
from them. I hope to say, 'Here is something we can take away from Vietnam that
is constructive and applicable to the world of today and tomorrow.' That is the
only way our nation can ever hope to leave the past behind."

Like many others, I disagreed at the time with almost every position Mr.
McNamara held, and have my own residual share of deep anger as a legacy of those
years. But I see nothing to be gained, and much to be lost, by reinforcing such
resentment in the present, as you urge us to do. The lessons Mr. McNamara has
learned are lessons we all need to learn, and we owe him thanks for that.

ROBERT MCAFEE BROWN
Palo Alto, Calif., April 12, 1995

The writer is professor emeritus of theology and ethics at the Pacific School of
Religion.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse;
Too Ready to Forgive

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 68 words


To the Editor:

Congratulations on your April 12 editorial regarding "Mr. McNamara's War": it
has restored my faith in clear, objective and hard-hitting journalism.

Having served two years as a Marine in Vietnam, I've been distressed lately
about the publicity and seemingly forgiving nature of the coverage of Robert S.
McNamara and his new book.

MARSHALL N. CARTER
Boston, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse;
No Secret Information

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


To the Editor:

In "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12), you note that Robert McNamara now
admits "no superior knowledge" existed, which was a favorite argument advanced
to justify the war. In fact, he has been aware of the absence of such
justification for at least close to 30 years.

While a student at Harvard Law School in the 1960's, I attended a small defense
policy seminar at which Secretary of Defense McNamara argued his support for the
war. (I believe this was on his ill-starred trip to Harvard in November 1966.)

By this point, I had reluctantly concluded that the war could not be justified
and was therefore wrong; but as a 23-year-old, idealistic and patriotic
American, I hoped there was some justification. During the question-and-answer
period, I asked Mr. McNamara if he and the Administration possessed "secret
information" that justified the war.

I will never forget his response. He said, in substance: "There is no such
information. I base my views on the same information that you read in The New
York Times. I may receive that information a day or two ahead of you, but it is
essentially the same information."

I remember my feeling of despair. It was then that I knew for certain, and
beyond all doubt, that the war was wrong and would most certainly be lost. What
I could not understand then, and am not certain I understand today, is why he
could not see it.

ROBERT D. JOFFE
New York, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse;
Point of No Return

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 113 words


To the Editor:

Robert S. McNamara, in his retrospective on the Vietnam War (front page, April
9), deserves all the blame he heaps on himself, and more. But he remains naive
if he believes that the United States could have withdrawn from Vietnam after
the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem.

When you are responsible for the assassination of the head of state of a wartime
ally, you cannot simply wash your hands and walk away. At that point, it was our
war.

Of all the difficulties in waging the war that Mr. McNamara pleads, only one
mattered: the lack of leadership and a coherent strategy at the very top.

PAUL MICHEL LION
McLean, Va., April 9, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse;
They Lost Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


To the Editor:

Re "McNamara Recalls, and Regrets, Vietnam" (front page, April 9): The 20th
anniversary of the fall of Saigon to the North Vietnamese Army's mechanized
divisions, modern infantry formations, world-class artillery and updated MIG
jets and electronics is still observed by United States journalists and
politicians as a tragic loss for a benighted United States policy, flawed and
misguided in a futile effort to interest an agrarian folk culture in a colonial
exploitation doomed to failure.

Robert S. McNamara, the former Defense Secretary who once championed escalation
of the war, bursts into tears to mark the occasion.

The truth is still concealed because the American liberal-left, including Bill
Clinton, cannot afford public recognition or acknowledgment that the left
acquiesced in and made possible the Red conquest of South Vietnam over many
years.

The doctrinal lessons of Vietnam preached so meticulously by the United States
left leave out the crucial facts: the presence and function of the Soviet Union
and its assets in the absorption of South Vietnam as a stategically critical
operation of the cold war, involving the conflict between the Soviet Union and
China as much as East-West conflict.

It is impossible to assert logically that the cold war is over, that the Soviet
Union and Communism lost, but that the United States lost to a legitimate Red
power in Vietnam. Mr. Clinton and the Democratic Party cannot escape historical
blame.

Robert McNamara weeps with good cause. A solemn United States commitment to
collective security in Southeast Asia, accepted by every legal authority in the
United States between 1954 and 1967, was disemboweled by turncoat, liberal
politicians.

JOHN RISCA WILLIAMS
West Palm Beach, Fla., April 9, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

We Can All Learn From McNamara's Remorse;
Give Profits to Veterans

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 108 words


To the Editor:

I don't know what Robert S. McNamara plans to do with the profits from the sale
of his memoirs, but he should not profit from the death of 58,000 Americans in
what became known as McNamara's War. You report (front page, April 9) that he
broke down in tears during the taping of an interview for television, and later
on explained that this profoundly embarrassed him, "but the sense of grief and
failure is strong."

The thing to do is give every nickel to Vietnam veterans. This should alleviate
some of his burden and, more important, put the money where it can do some good.


RICHARD WEIL
New York, April 9, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 829 words



International A2-8

JAPAN SEEKS TO REIN IN YEN
Japan introduced a plan to halt the ascent of the yen against the dollar. The
effort,intended to revive Japan's sluggish economy, included a cut in a key
interest rate, to 1 percent.  A1 A1

FORMER COMMANDOS SEEK HELP
More than 50 Vietnamese commandos who worked behind enemy lines for the U.S.
were imprisoned in the 1960's. The survivors want to leave Vietnam, but their
applications have been rejected by the U.S. A1


RUSSIA'S NEW TELEVISION STAR
Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the great anti-Soviet dissident who once turned his
wrath on the empty materialism and lowbrow culture of the West, has found a new
calling. He is a talk show host. A1

JAPANESE CULT LEADERS HUNTED
Police officers conducted searches around Japan for leaders of the sect
suspected of planning the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system last
month. Two sect followers once active in the Japanese underworld were arrested.
A3

RUSSIA CRITICIZED ON CHECHNYA
The campaign against Chechen rebels has become more brutal because of Russia's
desire to end visible resistance before world leaders come to Moscow on May 9.
A6

U.N. CONSIDERS IRAQI OIL SALES
The Security Council began formal debate on a resolution that would allow Iraq
to sell $2 billion in oil over six months to pay for relief and emergency goods.
A8

Nepal's new premier wants to revise a treaty with India. A3

Farmers in France ponder presidential politics. A5

West Bank tensions rise as Israeli troops shoot dogs in Hebron. A8

Turkey wins U.S. support on a plan to limit moves by rebel Kurds. A8

Libya plans to violate a ban on international flights. A8

Lobzenica Journal: Easter is now less political in Poland. A4

National A10-13, D18

PILOT'S COMPETENCE IN QUESTION
The pilot of a commuter plane that crashed in North Carolina last December,
killing 15 people, had been forced to leave another airline because of
incompetence.A1

GOING AFTER DELINQUENT FATHERS
The experience of Georgia, a national leader in the pursuit of delinquent child
support, suggests both the potential for and the limits of measures to enforce
payment. A1

HOSPITAL TO LOSE ACCREDITATION
A private accreditation group said it would lift the accreditation of a Florida
hospital where several botched surgeries and treatments were performed.  A10

NEW QUESTIONS ON STUDENT
A student whose admission to Harvard was rescinded after it was learned that she
had killed her mother faced widening accusations about her integrity.  A10

DORNAN ENTERS RACE
Robert Dornan, the firebrand conservative Representative from California,
entered the 1996 Presidential race, promising to restore the American dream.
A11

FOR LOBBIES, A GOOD START
Corporate and business lobbyists agreed they faired wellin the first 100 days of
this Congress.  A12

DIVIDED JURY IS DEPICTED
A former juror in the Simpson trial told the judge of a panel torn by racial
tensions.  A13

President Clinton said any tax relief should help the middle class.  A12

An appeals court backs a woman's effort to enter The Citadel.  A10

Coretta Scott King lost a bid to regain her husband's papers.  A13

Law D19

Stalwart of Kennedy's Justice Department now convicted of fraud.

At the Bar: Law schools fiddle with data in the quest for high rankings.

Metro Digest B1

TAKEOVER OF NEWARK SCHOOLS
Calling the system riddled with failure, a state judge ordered New Jersey's
Education Department to take over the long-troubled Newark school district. A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-28

Natural history treasures.  C1
At Chinatown's Holiday Inn.  C1
For Children C23
Theater: Mamet's "Cryptogram." C3
On Stage, and Off C2
Film: "Clean, Shaven." C5
"The Cormorant." C18
Restaurants C24
Art: French photographer.  C1
Drawings from Stanford.  C4
Inside Art C26
Art in Review C4
Books: Tracing the circuits in the modern mind.  C28
Television: TV Weekend D26
Home Video D26

Sports B9-16

Baseball: The real Yanks beat the real Mets.  B9
Basketball: Knicks rip Bullets.  B9
Nets lose to 76ers.  B11
Columns: Vecsey on baseball.  B9
Robert Lipsyte.  B16
Football: Jets not likely to pick McNair.  B15
Hockey: Rangers not panicking. Yet.  B16
Racing: Derby rehearsals.  B15
Yachts: A triumph for Conner.  B9

Obituaries D21

David D. Thompson, former director of New York Hospital.
Diane Cleaver, literary agent and author.

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Mr. Iacocca's new bottom line.
Connecticut school segregation.
Endangered integrity.
The P.L.O. crackdown in Gaza.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: The crackpot factor.
A. M. Rosenthal: Stacking the deck.
Ludmilla Thorne: Blitzkrieg in Chechnya.

Chronicle B7

Crossword C23

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Dornan, House Firebrand, Joins the '96 Race

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 900 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 13


Representative Robert K. Dornan of California, a firebrand conservative
Republican who is perhaps the most garrulous and acerbic legislator on Capitol
Hill, entered the 1996 Presidential race today, garrulously and acerbicly.

And also joyously.

"Come with me," the 62-year-old nine-term Congressman from Orange County said in
an announcement speech in Washington. "I'm going to enjoy myself."

Mr. Dornan's speech, delivered at a memorial to slain police officers, promised
to restore the American dream, wandered to an assertion that he had never yelled
at his office staff, compared injuries he suffered in ejecting from a jet
fighter in peacetime with wounds that the Senate majority leader, Bob Dole,
suffered in World War II combat, and finally concluded with a passionately
voiced wish to "go down swinging."

"I love the dust," said the man who once called President Clinton "a disgraced
draft dodger," who recently accused homosexuals of turning AIDS into "a
political problem instead of a health problem" and who maintains that abortion
is "a national sin" and that service in the military is not just patriotic but a
sacred rite of passage.

Most political experts predict that few voters will respond to Mr. Dornan's
message, saying he is too vociferously to the right even for the Republican
Party's powerful right wing. But given his 16 years of combat on Capitol Hill --
he once grabbed a fellow legislator by the necktie and called him "a
draft-dodging wimp" -- there is every expectation that he will go down swinging
energetically.

The eight other announced or almost-announced Republican candidates, among them
Mr. Dole, either have more money than Mr. Dornan or already have latched on to
some of his favorite ideas, or both.

But Arnie Steinberg, a California political consultant who worked with Mr.
Dornan in one of his House campaigns, said: "Don't underestimate Bob's
one-on-one skills and his proven ability to stir debate and raise some money
among the faithful.  He's got a real message. But his real impact, if he has
any, might be to steal away some support from Phil Gramm, which is a problem
Phil already faces with Pat Buchanan and Alan Keyes."

As for a Democratic assessment of Mr. Dornan's chances, Bill Press, the
California Democratic chairman, offered, in good Dornan style, "He has as much
chance of being elected President as Madonna."

Mr. Dornan's Congressional record is mostly one of staunch opposition to
abortion, sex education, homosexuality and gun control, combined with
uncompromising support for anti-crime measures and a strengthening of the armed
forces, not least the military installations and contractors in his Orange
County district. But he is probably best known, when he is known at all
nationally, for the way he advocates rather than for what he advocates.

A few weeks ago, for example, he made national headlines when he asserted in a
speech on the floor of the House that Mr. Clinton "gave aid and comfort to the
enemy" by participating in student protests against the Vietnam War.

House members, including Republican colleagues, had the remarks stricken from
the record and imposed a 24-hour suspension on Mr. Dornan's floor privileges. It
was the first such suspension in 21 years.

Today, alluding to that episode in his announcement speech and a follow-up news
conference, Mr. Dornan held his ground with vintage tenacity.

"On the floor of the House, in the well, yes, I've been tough," he said, "tough
as Patrick Henry yelling, 'Give me liberty or give me death.' I apologize for
nothing where I was indignant over my years in the House.

"But I will tell you that if someone is not publicly indignant about the
bankrupt policies of this, the richest country ever, destroying the American
dream economically, and if somebody is not publicly indignant and saying, 'Stop
this,' with our cultural meltdown and moral decline, then I'll show you somebody
who doesn't understand the facts. I'll show you somebody who's a bystander
watching the destruction of their country."

Mr. Dornan has lately spread his gospel by serving as a substitute host on some
national talk shows, including Rush Limbaugh's. He honed his broadcast skills as
a television talk show host in Southern California in the 1970's and also worked
as an actor back then, having gained access to show business through Jack Haley,
his uncle, who played the Tin Man in "The Wizard of Oz."

Before that, he was a pilot in the Air Force, an experience that appears to have
deeply influenced his views on patriotism, duty and national purpose. On Capitol
Hill, he is known as B-1 Bob because of his relentless advocacy of military
power, in particular the B-1 bomber, manufactured in good part in Southern
California.

Within his own district, he is a formidable fund-raiser, one of the best in
Congress. Again and again over the years he has gone to his constituents in
search of money for re-election, and again and again they have given, obviously
pleased with his message and the way he delivers it.

Will that message and style of delivery now play well beyond Orange County,
drawing both money and votes nationally?

Near the end of his appearance today, Mr. Dornan replied that if his campaign
could contribute to the strength of his country, he would be satisfied. "Money
does not buy you everything," he said. "Winning is not everything."



NAME: Robert K. Dornan

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Robert Kenneth Dornan"

CURRENT JOB: United States Representative, 46th District of California.

BORN: April 3, 1933, New York City.

EDUCATION: Loyola University, 1950-53. Loyola High School, Los Angeles.

RELIGION: Roman Catholic.

MILITARY SERVICE: United States Air Force as a peacetime fighter pilot, 1953-58.
California Air National Guard fighter pilot, then Air Force Reserve rescue and
seaplane pilot and intelligence officer, 1958-75, attaining the rank of captain.


MARRIED: Sallie Hansen in 1955.

CHILDREN: Robin Marie Griffin, Robert Kenneth Dornan 2d, Theresa Ann Cobban,
Mark Douglas Dornan, Kathleen Regina Penn.

GOVERNMENT POSITIONS: United States Representative 1977-82; 1985 to the present.


OTHER MAJOR POSITIONS: Produced and was host of radio and television public
affairs programs in Los Angeles, 1965-76.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Once Commandos for U.S., Vietnamese Are Now Barred

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1275 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 13


They say they are the lost patrols of America's war in Vietnam: more than 50
Vietnamese commandos who worked in secret behind enemy lines for the Central
Intelligence Agency and the United States military.

The commandos and more than 400 of their fellow spies were captured and
imprisoned in the 1960's, Government records show. They survived for decades in
forced-labor camps. Now they want to leave Vietnam, where they are reviled as
traitors, and come to the United States.

The United States Immigration and Naturalization Service does not believe their
stories and has rejected their applications, and a spokesman refused to discuss
the case.

But recently declassified 25-year-old Pentagon reports strongly support their
claims. So does the man who was the Defense Intelligence Agency's top analyst on
prisoners of war in Vietnam. Now the United States Ambassador in Thailand has
taken up the lost commandos' cause.

In a cable sent from Bangkok last month and distributed widely throughout the
nation's intelligence agencies, the Ambassador, David F. Lambertson, said the
former Defense Intelligence Agency analyst, Sedgwick Tourison, had presented
"specific and detailed information" showing that the Vietnamese commandos were
"U.S. contract employees and that, prior to their capture, they were paid with
appropriated U.S. Government funds."

Mr. Lambertson, who was a Foreign Service officer in Vietnam from 1965 to 1968,
said the Immigration and Naturalization Service should reconsider its rejection
of the pleas for refugee status. The United States Embassy in Bangkok has long
handled Vietnamese immigration and refugee issues.

"We believe they qualify, based on their associations with U.S. policies and
programs and serving long incarcerations," said the cable from the Ambassador.

It said the Vietnamese commandos were captured "while engaging in U.S.-directed
missions to collect intelligence, conduct military and psychological operations,
or to render assistance to downed American air crews."

A spokesman for the immigration service said tonight that he was unable to
answer any questions.

As the 20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon approaches, old wounds are being
reopened for many Vietnamese. None will be more painful than the lost commandos'
story, said Mr. Tourison; he was chief of analysis of the Defense Intelligence
Agency's special office for P.O.W.-M.I.A. affairs in the 1980's and a principal
author of the final report of the Senate Select Committee on Prisoners of
War/Missing in Action in 1993.

"There is no doubt in my mind that these agents are who they claim to be, that
they undertook the missions they say they did and that we, the United States
Government, have known their fates since the mid-1960's," Mr. Tourison said in
an interview. His book on the commandos, "Secret Army, Secret War," is to be
published in August by Naval Institute Press.

The former investigative counsel for the Senate committee on prisoners of war,
John Mattes, who is preparing to file a suit in Federal Court seeking the
captured commandos' back pay, said: "While it is a tragedy that we left these
P.O.W.'s behind, it's a national scandal that we would seek to deny their
existence and to rewrite history to eliminate them."

Mr. Mattes was referring both to the actions of the immigration service and to a
long-secret, recently declassified Pentagon history of the commandos: the Macsog
report, short for Military Assistance Command/Studies and Observations Group. He
and Mr. Tourison said information about the commandos in the 1970 report was
deliberately withheld from the Pentagon Papers, the official Government history
of the Vietnam war.

"This was the secret," said a senior official of the Clinton Administration who
served in Vietnam in the 1960's. "This was our pathetic and utterly unsuccessful
effort to undermine the North Vietnamese."

The Macsog report describes the commandos' experience as "a one-way street with
no hope of return."

The commandos were a mix of South Vietnamese Army officers and civilians; many
originally came from North Vietnam and knew the terrain and the dialects. The
money came from the United States Navy's covert operations budget and was
laundered by the C.I.A. through off-shore transactions.

"Members of Congress didn't ask and the Navy didn't tell what the funds were
used for," said Mr. Tourison, who has reviewed the Macsog report and interviewed
retired C.I.A. officers who served in Vietnam.

McGeorge Bundy, national security adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson,
recalled the operations in an interview as "a covert infiltration of specially
trained Vietnamese."

"It didn't work," he said. Nearly all of the commandos were killed, captured or
lost.

"The program was a disaster," said Mr. Mattes, who has read the Macsog report.
"By '69 we had lost them all. The majority were captured alive, and we knew it.
They were tried as war criminals and Radio Hanoi broadcast their sentences, up
to 30 years. We went to their families and said, 'They're dead.' We wrote them
off. We did nothing to seek their return or release. We kept the operation
secret."

The commandos slipped into North Vietnam by night on junks, sampans and
speedboats, were parachuted in by the South Vietnamese Air Force, or were
dropped by the C.I.A. from Air America planes into Laos to walk into the war
zone.

And there they disappeared. The Macsog report lists 52 "long-term agent inserts"
of teams as large as 17 commandos between 1961 and 1967. And it lists their
fates:

"Captured soon after landing."

"Hanoi Radio announced capture."

"Team destroyed."

"Last radio contact 2 Dec. '66."

"Team believed under North Vietnam control."

"Team reported in Laos again and ready for pickup. Could not locate."

"Captured soon after landing."

"Captured soon after landing."

"Doubled, played, terminated."

That last phrase suggests that the United States discovered that a commando team
was secretly working for North Vietnam, used the team to feed false information
to the enemy and then killed its members.

In his memoir, "Hazardous Duty" (Summit Books), a retired Army major general,
John K. Singlaub, says the United States Army delivered "booby-trapped gift
packages" to the suspect teams, including "time bombs or demolition charges set
to explode when a carton of cigarettes was opened."

The commando operations began as a C.I.A. effort no later than 1961; the
Pentagon took them over in January 1964 under an ambitious covert program called
OPLAN 34-A. The highest-ranking White House, State Department, C.I.A. and
Pentagon officials knew of the missions.

In his new book, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam" (Times
Books), former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara writes that the 34-A
commando missions were "essentially worthless," because "most of the South
Vietnamese agents sent into North Vietnam were either captured or killed."

But he adds an intriguing mystery.

He says he met with President Johnson; Mr. Bundy; the Director of Central
Intelligence, John McCone, and others after the Maddox, an American destroyer,
was attacked by the North Vietnamese in the Gulf of Tonkin on Aug. 2, 1964 -- an
incident that led to the dramatic intensification of the war. All present were
aware that a 34-A commando raid had been carried out on two islands in the Gulf
of Tonkin two days earlier.

The attack on the Maddox was "so irrational," he writes, that "some believed the
34-A operations had played a role in triggering North Vietnam's actions" -- and
thus in transforming a small, out-of-the-way conflict into a full-bore war.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On McNamara: Hanoi Agrees

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 138 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 13


The Vietnamese Government said today that former Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara was right to disavow the Vietnam War.

"We hold that Mr. McNamara's opinion saying the United States was 'terribly
wrong' in the Vietnam War is a judgment suitable with the reality," the Foreign
Ministry said.

In a book published this week, Mr. McNamara, one of the chief American
architects of the Vietnam War, said he and other advisers to Presidents Kennedy
and Johnson were "terribly wrong" in their handling of the war, in which as many
as three million Vietnamese and 58,000 Americans were killed.

Breaking a 27-year silence, Mr. McNamara said he had secretly believed that
American involvement was futile and that the United States should have withdrawn
from South Vietnam as early as 1963. The war ended 12 years later.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


To the Editor:

It is sad that Robert S. McNamara carries such a heavy burden, believing himself
to be responsible for the lives lost and the blood spilled in the war in
Vietnam. It is unfortunate that The Times, which supported the war effort in its
early stages, is so unforgiving in its "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April
12), as if it were all so unnecessary.

In a representative democracy such as ours, the whole of the nation shares
equally in the costs history extracts from us, as we do the best we can in
making our way in the world. All Americans who voted and chose not to vote in
all the Presidential and Congressional elections of that era did the best they
could, given the information available to us.

In the largest sense, we did extremely well. We managed our way through the
gravest threat to our nation's existence -- without a shot being fired in a
nuclear war. Only if we think of Vietnam as an isolated event, a war unto
itself, might we have some excuse now in thinking of it as a tragic and useless
exercise.

Of course, it was not, but rather an extended battle during the long cold war
that stretched almost from V-J Day in 1945 to the fall of the Berlin Wall. A
century from now, history will also look back upon the "police action" in Korea
as another such battle, indecisive, but critical to the final outcome.

Lincoln understood the imperatives of history as he grieved over the fallen at
Gettysburg, among the gray, as well as the blue. Our democracy triumphed then
over the dark impulse of man to enslave his brothers, just as it did in our
delicate, half-century war with the egalitarian elites of Moscow and Beijing.

Now especially, with the cold war won, ordinary Americans who lost loved ones in
the battles of Korea and Vietnam know full well that their lives were not lost
in vain. Robert McNamara and The Times should not try to persuade them
otherwise.

JUDE WANNISKI
Morristown, N.J., April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
Losing the Peace

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


To the Editor:

It was with frustration that I read your April 12 editorial "Mr. McNamara's War"
and the public response to that editorial in today's edition. Both dwelt on an
analysis of events concluded over 20 years ago, demonstrating that Vietnam is
still an event, a war, a subject for scholarly debate, but not a place.

I served in Vietnam as a platoon leader from 1969 to 1970 and was an instrument
for the execution of Robert S. McNamara's policies, and so were 14 of my friends
whose names appear on the wall that causes Mr. McNamara to "weep easily and have
strong feelings."

I have little sympathy or appreciation for Mr. McNamara's tears because the
ultimate irony is he will again profit from his position as one of the "best and
the brightest." This, while hundreds of thousands of veterans in this country
are homeless, and they and their families are suffering from the effects of
Agent Orange, post-traumatic stress disorder and the more subtle but real
effects of alienation from a society that visited upon them the wrath it felt
about Mr. McNamara's policies.

Since the war, I have returned to Vietnam six times, beginning in 1991, largely
assisting United States nongovernmental organizations in their humanitarian work
for the people of Vietnam. On those trips, I have observed firsthand the effects
of the now-lifted United States embargo on the people of Vietnam, for whom we
presumably fought to create a better life where democracy could grow.

The population in Vietnam is now approximately 7 million, having doubled since
the end of the war. More than half the people were not even born during the time
of the conflict, yet they, and especially their children, bear the brunt of
United States punitive policy toward Vietnam.

The Vietnamese are looking to the future and we, having lost the war and the
objectives we sought to achieve there by force of arms, are in the process of
losing the peace.

JAMES F. O'BRIEN
Boston, April 13, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
A Solemn Obligation

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 112 words


To the Editor:

How dare you, in "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12), equate the
battlefield heroism of American troops with street protests of the period? Those
who served fulfilled a solemn obligation of citizenship; those who protested
merely exercised their first amendment rights.

Our troops were not innocent lambs unable to differ with the policies of elected
leaders. They were, rather, Americans who recognized the supremacy of our
constitutional system, and who realized that an individual opinion, whether
ultimately proved right or wrong, is not license to ignore the rule of law.

FREDERICK A. LEHRER
Stamford, Conn., April 13, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
To March Again

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 249 words


To the Editor:

Today's editorial "Mr. McNamara's War" is one of the finest you have ever
printed. It should remind us that our elected officials do not always know what
is best for us.

As I approach 60 years of age, a member of that so-called silent generation of
the 1950's, and not much of an activist, my two proudest memories are of having
shared the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s dream in the 1963 March on
Washington and my early participation in anti-Vietnam War protests.

I do not forget that my beloved brother-in-law, a gentle man who served his
country at age 18 in World War II, accused me of sedition. But neither do I
forget that my nephew, now 38, once said he remembered that I was the first
person he knew to oppose the Vietnam War.

Nor have I forgotten the young men and women we lost to Canada, or those gallant
students who died protesting at Kent State University in the spring of 1970.
Wouldn't it be fitting to erect a memorial to them, alongside the Vietnam
memorial? But I can think of more fitting memorials to them all. For the time
has come again.

I cannot wait 30 years for the restrospective guilt and tears of today's amoral
leaders. While we are still one nation indivisible (and who knows for how much
longer), it is time to repudiate the Gingrich contract and renew Rousseau's
social contract, without which no democracy can survive. I am ready to march
again, but who will lead the way?

LOIS C. SCHWARTZ
New York, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
Delusions of the Time

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 118 words


To the Editor:

I read with dismay your editorial "Mr. McNamara's War" (April 12), blithely
condemning Robert McNamara to a haunted end and refusing his explanation in his
new book of his conduct as Secretary of Defense and afterward until now.

I worked in that Pentagon after my graduation from Yale Law School. While others
tried to help us see the mistakes being made, I and others labored under the
delusions of the time. Only long after the war did I come to recognize how wrong
was my thinking.

Is it not understandable that our top military leader -- brilliant, hard working
and committed -- took longer to untangle his thinking than we did.

ARNOLD MESSING
Boston, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
Years of Madness

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 225 words


To the Editor:

Re "In Memoir, McNamara Recalls, and Regrets, Vietnam" (front page, April 9):
The man who bemoans his tragic mistakes is the same one who in "In Retrospect,"
a book of 414 pages only once mentioned the damage the United States caused to
Vietnam.

"The picture of the world's greatest superpower killing or seriously injuring
1,000 noncombatants a week . . . is not a pretty one" (page 269). Thus Robert S.
McNamara condensed the nightmarish years of madness and destruction that
Vietnamese suffered. Between soldiers and civilians, over two million Vietnamese
died; entire regions, including cities and towns, were scarred by bombs; 13
million gallons of chemical agents were dumped in Vietnamese soil, defoliating
whole forests and causing cancers, birth defects and congenital malformations
that still today haunt the Vietnamese.

Food resources were depleted, leading hundreds of thousands to famine, and
forced to leave their ancestral homes; enough timber was destroyed to meet the
country's needs for 30 years.

In sum, genocide and an ecocide of the greatest magnitude took place.

If Mr. McNamara is so stricken with remorse, perhaps he can extenuate his grief
by donating the proceeds of his book to poor hospitals and war-relief
institutions in Vietnam.

ALBERTO ARENAS
Oakland, Calif., April 13, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
Spreading Blame?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 202 words


To the Editor:

Thank you for your April 12 editorial about Robert S. McNamara's current stance
regarding Vietnam. His is not the courageous mea culpa it pretends to be. As a
principal proponent under President Lyndon B. Johnson of increased United States
involvement in Vietnam, he could be expected to identify and regret only his own
shortcomings.

Yet, his regrets are wide-ranging, pointing a finger at other Cabinet members as
well as himself, at President Johnson, at an unstable South Vietnamese
Government, at Director of Central Intelligence Richard Helms and others.

He also repudiates President Dwight D. Eisenhower and his three successors for
subscribing to the "domino theory."

Are we to conclude that Mr. McNamara would have been a more able, more
perceptive Secretary of Defense had it not been for all the problems beyond
himself that he cites? Is he regretting his own role in the Vietnam War or
spreading blame?

I am privileged to have served in Vietnam with the Marines as a rifle platoon
commander in 1967-68. What happended, happened. But pretense today by former
Government officials is neither productive nor welcome.

WILLIAM H. DOUGLASS
New York, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
We Were Right

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 114 words


To the Editor:

Thank you for "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12). Very early in the
Vietnam War, while in my mid-30's and the mother of baby boys, I joined the
small but growing group of war protesters. We wrote letters, marched on
Washington, circulated petitions, worked for Eugene McCarthy and George McGovern
and, most nights, I wept for our young men dying in Vietnam.

We were vilified by people who said that we were Communists, Un-American and we
had no right to question the actions of our Government. Now, 30 years later,
Robert S. McNamara has finally acknowledged that we protesters were right.

JOAN M. EDWARDS
St. Augustine, Fla., April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
He Wasn't Alone

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 69 words


To the Editor:

Your condemnation of Robert McNamara for his part in the Vietnam War (editorial,
April 12) seems entirely too harsh and mean-spirited.  He and Lyndon Johnson
were not alone in prosecuting the war. There were other Cabinet officers who
ranked as high as Mr. McNamara whose complicity in that monumental and bloody
tragedy should not be forgotten.

RALPH T. BIRDSEY
Atlanta, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
'Why We Died'

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 80 words


To the Editor:

"Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) was well done.

In 1919, Rudyard Kipling in effect previewed Robert S. McNamara's book and the
Lyndon Johnson- Robert McNamara deception when he wrote of World War I: "If any
question why we died, tell them, because our fathers lied."

GEORGE R. WRATNEY
Simsbury, Conn., April 12, 1995
The writer served as a first lieutenant in the Marine Corps in Danang, South
Vietnam, from April 1968 through May 1969.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
Advice Was Available

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 212 words


To the Editor:

Your April 12 editorial "McNamara's War" was devastating. However, these
supplementary comments are pertinent and warranted.

In his book "In Retrospect," Robert S. McNamara offers the incredible defense
that, early on, the United States Government lacked experts to consult about
Southeast Asia and China, owing to the McCarthy hysteria. However, were there no
reliable former ambassadors, United States and other, university area
specialists or Department of State experts to furnish him with information about
Vietnam and China?

There were other explorable routes in 1963. For one, the United States might
have turned the table on the North Vietnamese and Vietcong by proposing in good
faith, all-Vietnam, internationally supervised elections. That offer would have
delivered a blow to insurgency, violent change and those who were predisposed to
violate national borders.

Finally, Mr. McNamara's analogy, current in the Kennedy Administration, of the
Vietnam operation to Munich 1938 constituted an initial, grave American foreign
policy miscalculation. North Vietnam's drive to control and unite Vietnam was
not an act of aggrandizement, albeit Hanoi's action did constitute aggression.

ELLIOT A. COHEN
New York, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 14, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Credit McNamara in Winning the Cold War;
Citizen's Rebuke

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


To the Editor:

"Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) is literature, in addition to being
one of the most profound expressions of moral outrage to appear in a venue of
the major media. You have my congratulations and everlasting respect.

I didn't know any of the young men who died in Vietnam, and I've never visited
the memorial in Washington to run my fingers over a lost loved one's name.
Robert S. McNamara's confession, I feel, obliges me to go there. When I do, I'll
leave a copy of your editorial as my citizen's rebuke to the arrogance that
deprived those named on the black wall of life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.

JEAN CAREY BOND
New York, April 13, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Belated Regrets About Vietnam Create a Consensus of Antipathy

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1863 words


Robert S. McNamara's recently expressed regrets about United States involvement
in the Vietnam War seem to be reopening old wounds and reviving a raw debate
that was beginning to slip into history.

Reaction to the former Defense Secretary's revised views, published in his new
book, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," has mostly been
relentlessly negative, with little credence or charity accorded Mr. McNamara's
comment that "we were wrong, terribly wrong."

The criticism has come from just about every quarter -- combat veterans, former
colleagues in Government, hawks, doves, editorialists and, of course, the
children of the 60's who took to the streets and to the grassy grounds outside
Mr. McNamara's Pentagon window to noisily, sometimes violently, protest
"McNamara's war."

Here and there a few kind words have been voiced for the Defense Secretary in
the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations. But not many words and not very often.

In particular, many veterans bitterly fault Mr. McNamara, publicly a hawks' hawk
throughout his Pentagon days, for his most striking admission: that he knew as
early as 1967 that involvement in the conflict was a catastrophic mistake but
that he could not bring himself to say so until almost three decades later.

"It sure would have been helpful in May of 1967, when I volunteered for Vietnam,
if he had said then that the war was unwinnable," Max Cleland, who lost both
legs in Vietnam and afterward served as head of the Veterans Administration,
said in an interview.

"The title of his book should be 'Sorry About That,' " added Mr. Cleland, a
Democrat who is now Georgia's Secretary of State, dredging up an old "grunt"
phrase of cynical resignation and frustration.

"McNamara went to the World Bank," Mr. Cleland concluded, "while a lot of other
people went to their graves."

Similar criticism came from Senator John McCain of Arizona, a former Navy pilot
who was tortured by the North Vietnamese while spending seven years in a Hanoi
cell.

"I think it's about 25 years too late to save those Americans who would be alive
if he hadn't pursued a policy that was doomed to failure," Mr. McCain said.

The Senator, a Republican and critic of United States policy in the war, spoke
in a telephone interview from Hanoi. He was in Vietnam on a special mission to
recover remains of dead Americans and to urge restoration of diplomatic
relations between Washington and Hanoi.

"I can only assume," Mr. McCain said, "that McNamara's doing it now because he's
trying to assume some place in history. What that place would be, I don't know,
unless it would be as one of the architects of a policy that doomed more than
40,000 American young people and caused a division in our country. That's
McNamara's legacy."

Martin Kaplan of Seattle, who was sent to Vietnam in 1969, is still angry about
the war, and the McNamara book has only exacerbated that anger.

"I don't see McNamara's revelations doing any good for anyone," Mr. Kaplan said
as he and several other veterans sat together on Wednesday night, watching the
former Defense Secretary discuss his book on the television show "Prime Time
Live." "There's a sense of betrayal. To him it was just all an intellectual
exercise. And he was called one of the best and brightest?"

Most of the other veterans sitting with Mr. Kaplan also expressed anger about
Mr. McNamara's revelation. But then, with some wiping away tears as the former
Secretary spoke, himself in tears, they offered an unusual perspective, one that
while it was not forgiving was nevertheless understanding.


A Veteran Dealing With Grief and Guilt

"We're seeing another Vietnam veteran dealing with his grief and guilt," said
Lee Raaen, a former Army draftee who was shipped to Vietnam in 1970 and now is a
Seattle lawyer. "But I suppose I could say, from a historical standpoint, 'It's
about time.' "

One of the few Government leaders from the Vietnam era to speak up in Mr.
McNamara's defense was McGeorge Bundy, a national security adviser at the White
House in both the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations.

"An excellent book, a very valuable one, a great contribution," Mr. Bundy

But should it have been written sooner?

"That's a funny ex post facto judgment," Mr. Bundy replied. "We are lucky to
have the book now. It is understandable that it took this time to write the
book. He was a very busy man 20 years ago."

Mr. McNamara, now 78 and retired from a lengthy stint as president of the World
Bank, contends as he makes the rounds of talk shows and book signings that his
book is not a work of redemption. Already in its second printing after an
initial run of 80,000 copies, it is meant, he says, to make people think and
debate so that history does not repeat itself.

That has done little to silence his critics. In fact, even some former close
colleagues and policy makers in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations are
speaking out about him.


Criticism Tinged With Disappointment

Theirs is a more gentle criticism, much of it tinged with disappointment that
Mr. McNamara somehow has abandoned the cause that was in good part his creation.
But it is criticism nonetheless, scoring Mr. McNamara not only for his switch
but also for saying now that American policy makers in the 1960's, himself
included, overestimated the Communist threat in Asia and underestimated and
misunderstood the Vietnamese people.

"He obviously has something to get off his chest," said Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, the top United States commander in Saigon for much of the war,
"but this is not the McNamara I did business with. None of this ever came up,
never was indicated to me.

"Recall that we went into Vietnam promising we would bear any price, any burden
to bolster the Vietnamese to self-sufficiency, and we almost did, until Congress
cut us off.

"You can't turn your back on a promise like that. I think McNamara should be
reminded of that."

Actually, American involvement in the war was ended during the Nixon
Administration. By then Mr. McNamara was at the World Bank and General
Westmoreland had left Saigon.

Former Nixon Administration officials have mostly remained silent on Mr.
McNamara's comments.


Losing the Battle, Winning the War

One of his war-era colleagues, Walt W. Rostow, President Lyndon B. Johnson's
hawkish national security adviser, said in a telephone interview from Texas that
he did not want to get into an argument with Mr. McNamara about the contents of
the book but he then quoted a recent newspaper commentary he had written.

"We certainly lost the battle, the test of will, in Vietnam, but we won the war
in Southeast Asia," Mr. Rostow argued in the commentary, taking direct issue
with Mr. McNamara's conclusion about how the war ended.

Then, taking still further issue, the commentary concluded, "This was surely not
simply a pointless, lost war. I am sure the families and the veterans have
suffered from this narrow view of the war in Southeast Asia."

Some criticism of Mr. McNamara has come from editorialists, along with reporters
and columnists who during the war were frequently at odds with American
officials over how much progress was being made.

In the Los Angeles Times a few days ago, the cartoonist Paul Conrad portrayed
the former Defense Secretary standing before the 58,000 names etched in the
black marble of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and saying, "Sorry
About That."

And in their syndicated "Politics Today" column, published today, Jack Germond
and Jules Witcover recall the "polarized and venomous" debate over the war that
raged in the mid-1960's, then add:

"Officialdom equated pursuit of the war with loyalty and patriotism and
criticism of it as disloyalty and even treason. The voice then of a key figure
in the conduct of the war, questioning its core, would have been explosive and
have given the protest a credibility it lacked with many Americans. Instead,
McNamara's voice now sounds more like a whimper from a man who needed to get his
mea culpa out of his system. It will offer little solace to the Americans who
served and died in Vietnam and to the thousands more at home who were vilified
for saying then what he has finally said now."


A Disciple of Peace Welcomes the Converted

One who spoke up back then and immediately ran afoul of officialdom was David
Harris, a freelance writer from San Francisco. In one of the more notable
anti-war protests of the era, he pointedly returned his draft card to his local
Selective Service Board, refused induction into the Army and was sentenced to
three years in prison, serving 20 months before being released.

"I welcome the converted," Mr. Harris said of the McNamara book. "It's a little
late and lot of people are dead or have been in prison or took off for Canada,
but I say, 'welcome aboard' to the man, better late than never."

Still, Mr. McNamara's mea culpa is far from totally satisfactory to Mr. Harris.

"Despite it all, his understanding of what happened still seems shallow," he
said. "You just don't drop the equivalent of 250 pounds of high explosives on
every man, woman and child in Southeast Asia and kill close to 60,000 Americans
and something like three million Vietnamese and then turn around, even 30 years
too late, and be done with it all by saying, 'Oh, I'm sorry. We were terribly
wrong.'

"It's too enormous and unforgivable for that. This is a start for him and
America that I welcome. But it's only a start."

Stanley Karnow, who reported from Vietnam as a journalist and then went on to
write one of the most definitive histories to date of the war, "Vietnam: A
History," finds Mr. McNamara's treatment of war protesters in print, as opposed
to his treatment of protesters as Pentagon chief, "a very, very interesting
exercise."

"He writes movingly of them, almost sympathetically at times," Mr. Karnow said.
"He's obviously a very tormented guy. An old protester like Bill Clinton will
probably take some solace from his kind words.

"All that said, and giving McNamara full credit for finally getting out his
story and his mea culpa, the cold fact is that admission is not an excuse. That
won't bring back somebody's lost son."


And What of Those He Tried to Save

And what of the Vietnamese, especially those from the South whom Mr. McNamara
tried to save? What do they think of his book?

One refugee from Saigon, Tony Lam, who fled the South Vietnamese capital just
before it fell in 1975 and eventually made it to Southern California, believes
that Mr. McNamara is terribly wrong on one important change of mind.

Mr. Lam takes unyielding issue with the former Secretary's conclusion that the
North Vietnamese leaders were primarily nationalists, not Communists. He said
Mr. McNamara had it right back in the 1960's when he was arguing, passionately,
that those leader were hard-line Communists.

Still, Mr. Lam, now a City Councilman in Westminster, Calif., has sympathy for
Mr. McNamara and the torment that drove him, finally, to write his book, however
it is being received.

"I praise his courage for admitting his mistakes," Mr. Lam said.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Stanley Karnow, left, reported from Vietnam as a journalist
during the war (Catherine Karnow) and Senator John McCain, Republican of
Arizona, was a Navy pilot and a prisoner of war. (Associated Press); Robert
McNamara wiping away tears yesterday in a "Prime Time Live" interview. (ABC
News/Prime Time Live); Vietnam veterans watching the former Secretary of
Defense, Robert McNamara, on television as he talks about the Vietnam War.
(Therese Frare for The New York Times); "He obviously has something to get off
his chest but this is not the McNamara I did business with," said Gen. William
Westmoreland, the top United States commander in Saigon for much of the Vietnam
War. (Mark Perlstein for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 868 words



International 2-5

OFFER TO EASE IRAQ SANCTIONS

The Security Council voted unanimously to offer Iraq easier terms under which to
sell oil to meet its urgent need for medicine, food and other essentials. 1

RWANDA'S PRISON SQUALOR

A filthy, overflowing prison underscores the crisis facing Rwanda; a year after
thousands died in massacres, the judicial system is still non-functioning. 1

BOSNIA ARMS SHIPMENTS IGNORED

The United States has chosen to ignore weapons shipments from Iran to the
Bosnian Government that in the last year have added considerably to its
firepower. 3

UNPLUGGABLE LEAK IN SANCTIONS

A senior official in the Italian Foreign Ministry said that Rome can do little
to stop Italian oil companies from selling fuel to Albania, even if much of it
is smuggled to Serbia. 3

PRECAUTIONS IN TOKYO

After a cult leader's prophecy that something horrible would happen in Tokyo on
April 15, the police and residents took precautions against a possible terrorist
attack. 5

DISAPPOINTMENT IN EL SALVADOR

More than two years after a peace agreement ended the civil war in El Salvador,
a poverty-stricken village, like others, is seething with feelings of betrayal.
5

Holy Week in Spain: Seven days, seven nights of spectacle. 4

Fergana Journal: Life on a tightrope for God and money. 4

National 6-9, 25

LITTLE SYMPATHY FOR McNAMARA

The public reaction to Robert S. McNamara's regrets about the war that the
United States waged in Vietnam has been almost relentlessly negative.  7

The young Bill Clinton is vindicated, the White House said. 7

CLINTON, GORE AND THEIR 1040'S

Their 1994 tax returns show that Vice President Al Gore earned a lot more than
the President last year and was a lot less generous.  8

A SOLDIER'S ANNIVERSARY

Fifty years to the day after being badly wounded in combat, Senator Bob Dole of
Kansas returned to his hometown to receive the blessing of family and old
friends in his quest for the Presidency.  8

The New Yorker who rescued Lieut. Bob Dole.8

SIMPSON PROSECUTORS PRESS ON

Prosecutors in the Simpson trial continued their effort to rehabilitate a
crucial witness, the police evidence collector Dennis Fung.  6

THE BIG EFFECTS OF A LITTLE MIX-UP

A small coal mine on a Navajo reservation has become the subject of a
bureaucratic skirmish that could cripple the agency charged with overseeing
strip mines.  6

TEXANS WIN ADOPTION FIGHT

A Texas couple whose battle to adopt two black children prompted a lawsuit over
limits on interracial adoption will be given custody of the boys after all.  8

MORE WOES FOR MAYOR BARRY

Washington's Mayor has become embroiled in a Federal investigation of possible
money laundering and in a fierce battle over pay cuts for municipal workers.  9

An earthquake in Texas caused more surprise than damage.  6

Beliefs: The bedrock stories of two faiths.25

Metro Digest 21

TIGHTENING RULES ON SHELTERS

The Pataki administration has proposed new regulations that would require local
governments to evict the homeless from shelters if they do not follow a variety
of rules, including participating in treatment and training programs. 1

TWO THEORIES ON TRADE CENTER

Prosecutors are trying to prove that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman masterminded a plot
to blow up the World Trade Center. They will also soon try to prove that Ramzi
Ahmed Yousef masterminded the plot. Can both theories be right?  1

DEMAND DECLINES FOR SPECIALISTS

With the popularity of managed care, many young doctors are finding themselves
unemployed, particularly in places like New York, where specialists are already
in abundant supply.  1

Business Digest 31

Sports 26-30

WHO WILL SAY 'PLAY BALL'?

In baseball's other labor dispute, the owners and the umpires are still at odds,
and both sides wonder whether players would cross an opening-day picket line.  1


Baseball: Green unhappy.  28

Dodgers pummel Perez.  28

Basketball: Knicks win.  27

Union head resigns.  27

Coleman calls it quits.  29

Columns: Araton on Knicks.  27

Football: Giants sign a safety.  29

Hockey: Rangers beat Bruins.  27

Devils defeat Islanders.  28

Yacht Racing: Young America defeats Mighty Mary.  29

Arts/Entertainment 11-17

Theater: "The Fall Guy." 11

Music: Slash's Sanakepit.  11

Perspectives Ensemble.  14

Spotlight on French horns.  15

Pamela Frank, violinist.  15

Kalichstein and Bronfman.  17

Recalling Sarah Vaughan.  11

Obituaries 9-10

Burl Ives, balladeer and actor.  10

Robert Wilson Crawford, built and expanded Philadelphia's parks.  10

Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19

Editorials

Strong-arming the homeless.

Official secrets, officials' privacy.

Up in Central Park.

Legitimizing music theft.

Letters

Russell Baker: Better not tried.

Bob Herbert: School bus strike? Go slow.

Mitchell L. Moss: Empty promises for Harlem.

Pamela S. Falk: Trapped in Cuba.

Chronicle 20

Bridge 16

Crossword 14

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


"It sure would have been helpful in May of 1967, when I volunteered for Vietnam,
if he had said then that the war was unwinnable." -- MAX CLELAND, former V.A.
director, who lost both legs in Vietnam, referring to Robert S. McNamara. [7:1.]

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 89 words



Criticism for McNamara

The public reaction to Robert S. McNamara's regrets about the war that the
United States waged in Vietnam has been broadly and almost relentlessly
negative. Page 7.

The 1040 of the Top 2

Their 1994 tax returns show that Vice President Al Gore earned a lot more than
the President last year and was a lot less generous. Page 8.

A Soldier's Anniversary

Fifty years after being badly wounded in combat, Senator Bob Dole received his
hometown's blessing of his quest for the Presidency. Page 8.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Burl Ives Is Dead -- The tender folk singer who went on to win
an Oscar for his earthy acting died of mouth cancer at his home near Seattle. He
was 85. Page 10. (Reuters,1959)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Remembering New Jersey's Veterans

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A volunteer sandblasts the walkway along the Vietnam Memorial in
Homdel, N.J., in preparation for its May 7 unveiling. Names of New Jersey
veterans who died in the war are stenciled onto the wall on 366 granite panels,
each representing a day of the year, including leap year. (Sam D'Amico for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Feels He's Vindicated on Vietnam by McNamara Book

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


President Clinton believes that former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara's
autobiographical confession that the Vietnam War was a terrible mistake
vindicates his own youthful opposition to the war, the White House said today.

In an off-camera discussion with reporters from CNN after an interview on
Thursday, Mr. Clinton also said that his understanding of the war was deepened
by information not available to the public at the time -- information he got as
a Georgetown University student working as a junior aide to J. William
Fulbright, the Democratic Senator from Arkansas who opposed the war.

Mr. Clinton's precise comments were not available. The television microphones
had been switched off when he made them, and the White House declined to release
what it said was a poor-quality audiotape by its staff of the conversation
between Mr. Clinton and the CNN correspondents, Wolf Blitzer and Judy Woodruff.

But the conversation, as recounted today by Mr. Blitzer and the White House
spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, brought up a tortured period in Mr. Clinton's
personal and political history, and put him in the position of seeming to offer
yet one more explanation for his behavior.

As a graduate student at Oxford University, Mr. Clinton protested the war and
successfully sought to avoid the draft for a time through a Reserve Officers
Training Corps deferment obtained with help from Mr. Fulbright's office. He
later gave up the deferment and made himself available for the draft, but drew a
high lottery number and was never called.

The issue exploded in the 1992 Presidential campaign when opponents accused Mr.
Clinton of dodging the draft, and it continues to dog him, especially in light
of the World War II record of the leading Republican Presidential contender,
Senator Bob Dole.

Mr. McCurry and Mr. Blitzer said the question of the President's efforts to
avoid the draft had not come up when the conversation turned to Mr. McNamara, at
the end of a formal 40-minute taping in the West Wing. Mr. Blitzer first
recounted the exchange on the air later Thursday. (Mr. McNamara lent Mr. Clinton
his summer house on Martha's Vineyard in 1993.)

"Judy asked, 'Have you read the McNamara book,' " Mr. Blitzer recalled in a
telephone interview today, "and he said, 'No, I haven't, but I have read a lot
of articles about it, and I think he did the right thing, it was a courageous
thing for him to do.'

"At which point, I said to the President, 'Do you feel vindicated?' And the
President immediately responded, 'Yes, yes, I do. I know that sounds
self-serving, but I do.' "

Mr. McNamara, whose book, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam"
was recently published by Times Books, has drawn unsparing criticism for waiting
nearly three decades to make known reservations he now says he felt at the time.
But Mr. McCurry said Mr. Clinton had not commented on that controversy, saying
only that he "thought it took a lot of courage to write the book and, on
balance, it was a good thing" that Mr. McNamara had done so.

"He thought that, on balance, the information in the book and the argument that
McNamara makes certainly vindicates the views of millions of Americans,
including President Clinton, that the Vietnam War was a sorry episode in
American history and that those who opposed the war had good grounds for doing
so," Mr. McCurry added.

Mr. Blitzer said the President had also said that as a college worker for Mr.
Fulbright, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, he had received a
low-level security clearance to handle papers about the committee's inquiries
into the war.

"He said he was privy to information that the general public didn't have about
the course of the war, and so he knew stuff," Mr. Blitzer said. "But he said
most of the stuff was in the newspapers anyway."

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              64 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

McNamara's Retreat

BYLINE: By Max Frankel;   Max Frankel, a columnist for The New York Times
Magazine and a former executive editor of The Times, was a Washington
correspondent covering diplomacy and the White House in the 1960's.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1962 words



IN RETROSPECT
The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam.
By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
Illustrated. 414 pp. New York:
Times Books/Random House. $27.50.

IN his 79th year, Robert S. McNamara at long last offers the public a glimpse of
his aching conscience. The most willful Vietnam warrior in the Kennedy and
Johnson Administrations, he was also the first at the top to admit defeat, in
private. He then stood silent on the war for a quarter-century and drowned his
sorrow in good works at the World Bank. Mr. McNamara personified the slow
maturing of America's foreign policy from cocky interventionism to
cost-conscious realism, yet for a generation he refused to explain his
conversion, explore his mistakes, judge his colleagues or instruct posterity.
The pain, or the guilt, was simply too great. As he states in the preface to "In
Retrospect": "This is the book I planned never to write."

Until now, he contends, the story of how "the best and the brightest" got it
wrong in Vietnam has not been told. But David Halberstam, who applied that
ironic phrase to his rendering of the tale 23 years ago, told it better in many
ways than Mr. McNamara does now. So, too, did the Pentagon Papers, that huge
trove of documents assembled at Mr. McNamara's behest when he first recognized a
debt to history. The contemporary analyses in the papers, which were leaked to
The Times in 1971, stand up so well that they now serve their patron as a major
source.

What Mr. McNamara adds to the public record are some White House documents and
tape transcripts revealing, most notably, his own agonized attempts in 1967 to
persuade President Lyndon B. Johnson to stop sending more men to the slaughter:
the Secretary of Defense who had come to tame the Pentagon with managerial
wizardry ended up desperately begging for a fig leaf for withdrawal, in the form
of a coalition that would inevitably give the Vietcong dominance in Saigon. Mr.
McNamara says he does not know to this day whether he thus quit or was fired.
"Maybe it was both."

But he left with a whimper, not a bang. So why speak out now? The main reason,
he says, is that he has "grown sick at heart witnessing the cynicism and even
contempt" with which so many Americans view their institutions and leaders. He
knows how much Vietnam contributed to that disaffection; he would never deny the
war's terrible damage. But he hopes to prove that the mistakes were "mostly
honest," even if traceable to a ghastly ignorance of the Vietnamese people,
culture and terrain, and the historical forces of that time.

Why should the rest of us relive his agony? Mr. McNamara, characteristically
statistical, points to "11 major causes for our disaster in Vietnam" in a
chapter called "The Lessons of Vietnam." But implicitly his book screams another
lesson: Though cynicism and contempt for power are destructive of government, a
respectful skepticism is essential, and rarely wrong.

BY delaying his war memoir so long, Mr. McNamara has greatly compounded the
difficulty of his mission. Now that the Soviet Union lies in ruins and American
corporations beg for business in China and Vietnam, no one under the age of 50
can be expected to fathom the fears and phobias of the 1960's to which he
rightly ascribes the Indochina disaster. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, the
most venerated American of the time, had taught -- and the Kennedy and Johnson
teams never dared to doubt in time -- that if South Vietnam was "lost" to
Communism, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Malaysia would fall like dominoes,
imperiling India, Burma, Indonesia and the Philippines, if not also Japan, and
emboldening the Russians and Chinese to extend Communist conquests by military
force or subversion in ways that would sooner or later provoke a nuclear World
War III, the very destruction of civilization.

Yes, that is how America's leaders spoke to each other and, all too
persuasively, to the public. Mr. McNamara's book reminds us that they even
repeated the litany in memos to their Presidents, to inoculate them against any
temptation to retreat from Vietnam. And if all those dominoes were not cause
enough, there were promises to be kept in order to preserve the value of
America's other diplomatic threats and commitments.

Mr. McNamara and his generation came to power convinced that the "appeasement"
of Nazi Germany -- the failure to block its early grasp for Europe's dominoes --
had led inevitably to a catastrophic World War II. Averting another such
disaster, they were sure, required punishing anything resembling Communist
aggression in its earliest stages, when the cost would be tolerable. That was
their creed as they rebuilt Western Europe and stood toe to toe with the Soviet
armies across Germany, fought to a bloody stalemate against China in Korea,
threatened war over Berlin and risked war to force Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
Thus "contained," the Soviets and Chinese took to endorsing "wars of
liberation," thereby qualifying even distant uprisings as threats to American
security. Mr. McNamara's first assignment from President John F. Kennedy was to
augment America's nuclear power, whose use was unimaginable, with the forces and
weapons they were sure would be needed to fight "conventional" wars.

From this bed of doctrine grew what Mr. McNamara considers his team's most
fateful error: mistaking Ho Chi Minh's nationalist drive to unite Vietnam as the
challenge of a monolithic Communist world. That misjudgment foreclosed any
discussion of how an American withdrawal from Indochina could be made
strategically tolerable. It even prevented analysis, before the plunge, of how
high a price the commitment was worth. Mr. McNamara's dry rendering of those
fateful tenets of containment fails to convey the passion with which they were
embraced. And he mostly ignores their powerful resonance in domestic politics.

Kennedy, no less than Johnson, subscribed to these simplistic doctrines and the
misjudgments they inspired, even though Mr. McNamara, without persuasive
evidence, deems it "highly probable" that Kennedy would have pulled back from
massive intervention in a second term. This presumes that had Kennedy lived, the
same cast of senior officials would have avoided what Mr. McNamara describes as
a second tier of error: the failure to live by the mantra that the battle in
Vietnam was political, a fight for the "hearts and minds" of an abused
peasantry, and that Americans could assist but never supplant the South
Vietnamese.

In this pew, Mr. McNamara himself was a prominent sinner. His can-do spirit
found no mission impossible, even as Saigon's governments and armies crumbled.
His domineering intellect and predilection for systems analysis made him a
pathetic victim of erroneous and deceptive military audits of bodies counted,
weapons captured, sorties flown, supply lines ruptured. Soon enough, as the
press decided, it became "McNamara's war," and certainly America's.

Mr. McNamara deplores the absence of political advice from old Asia hands who
had been driven from Government service in the McCarthy purges. But as he proves
again in this memoir, he did not easily integrate political wisdom and intuition
into his analyses. Even in retrospect, he does not associate the drift into war
in Vietnam with the Republican taunts that Democrats had "lost" China to
Communism. (Kennedy was afraid to recognize not only China but even Outer
Mongolia!) Mr. McNamara cannot bring himself to believe that the election
calendar affected Johnson's willingness to escalate the war in 1965 but not in
1964 or, as Johnson eventually confessed to Doris Kearns, that he stayed the
course in Asia because he feared losing effectiveness at home -- like Truman
after the "loss" of China -- as much as he feared the repercussions of defeat
abroad.

Finally, Mr. McNamara recounts a third tier of error -- an escalating pattern of
military misjudgment. He is hard on the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their
misplaced optimism in the early years, their always excessive faith in high-tech
weapons and their later expectations that massive bombing and frontal battles
could wear down the Vietnamese enemy. He is remiss in not fully rebutting the
postwar claims that timid civilians had tied the military's hands with
unreasonable limits on troop commitments and bombing targets. Mr. McNamara
emphasizes how little was accomplished by bombings heavier even than those in
World War II. And he explains Johnson's caution in target selection by recalling
the fear that a more rapid escalation could provoke Chinese intervention. But
Americans who cannot accept David's triumph over Goliath draw more belligerent
"lessons" from this history, which Mr. McNamara should have engaged more
directly.

Even more disappointing is Mr. McNamara's unwillingness to explore the human
tragedies and political legacies of this longest American war. What was it like
to send tens of thousands to their deaths in an increasingly dubious cause? How
did the strain affect the men in charge? We get a glimpse of Jacqueline Kennedy
beating him on the chest in protest against the war, and of angry insults hurled
on the ski slopes, but no real introspection. Mr. McNamara says the war tore
deeply at his own family, but quickly adds: "I am not comfortable speaking in
such terms."

What then of the political legacy? How, without growing cynical, can citizens
protect themselves against the stubborn ignorance and misplaced zeal of their
leaders? In the darkest days, Mr. McNamara remembers, he watched the
demonstrators from his Pentagon window and insisted that his subordinates show
respect for the freedoms of speech and assembly. But he took refuge -- and takes
it even now -- in opinion polls that recorded support from the majority of
Americans who, as he well knew, had been misinformed and denied vital
information at every major turn.

"Looking back," he writes, "I clearly erred by not forcing . . . a knock-down,
drag-out debate over the loose assumptions, unasked questions and thin analyses
underlying our military strategy in Vietnam. I had spent 20 years as a manager
identifying problems and forcing organizations -- often against their will -- to
think deeply and realistically about alternative courses of action and their
consequences. I doubt I will ever fully understand why I did not do so here."

YET even now Mr. McNamara means he should have stirred debate only inside the
small circle of Presidential counselors led by himself, Secretary of State Dean
Rusk and McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser (later succeeded by Walt
Rostow). Mr. McNamara blames Johnson for going to war furtively, with no regard
for the rights of Congress and the public, but he rejects any obligation to
resign in protest or, once out of office, to share his policy disagreements with
the country. Cabinet officers, he contends, should have a constituency of one:
the President -- from whom they derive all authority and through whom alone they
can be held accountable.

That is surely the right ethic for normal times. Unelected officials should not
steal their President's mandate to pursue an independent course. But a thousand
dead Americans a month create their own constituency. Even military discipline
admits a higher duty than hierarchical loyalty when power is badly used and puts
lives at risk.

Mr. McNamara relieved his private turmoil by reading poetry, and shared his
misgivings with Robert F. Kennedy and a few other intimates. But he refused to
abandon or attack the President whom he had helped to guide into quicksand. He
and Johnson "loved and respected" each other, in a bond that even now, in
retrospect, keeps the public at a distance looking on, with skepticism, I hope.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              65 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARCHITECTURE VIEW;
A Declaration of the 60's, Before the Doubts

BYLINE: By Herbert Muschamp

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words


BERGMAN MOVIES. FINNISH textiles. Franny and Zooey. Bertoia chairs. Kind of
takes you back, doesn't it? -- to the last liberal moment, before the 1960's
became The Sixties, with all the cultural helter-skelter that decade now stands
for.

The Ford Foundation Building takes you back there, too. Designed by Kevin Roche
John Dinkeloo & Associates, this 1967 landmark will receive the 25-Year Award
from the American Institute of Architects at the organization's convention next
month. The 12-story building is well worth a retrospective look, not only as one
of the last first-rate office buildings to go up in New York but also as the
expression of a time when people were more confident that they knew what
first-rate was.

To walk into this building, with its glorious enclosed garden, is to step back
into a time of confidence in the power of educated opinion to enforce cultural
standards. It is to revisit a time when people knew that European art movies
were inherently superior to Hollywood trash, when "good design" did not seem
like an attempt to impose elitist taste on mass consumers, when it was possible
to believe that progressive social and esthetic values could march together,
hand in hand.

The Ford Foundation Building, at 321 East 42d Street, near First Avenue, in
Manhattan, is a fine example of that belief. Just as the foundation exemplified
American philanthropy at its most enlightened, so the building epitomized an
ideal of architectural excellence. To begin with, it was plainly a magnificent
act of largess toward the foundation's employees. The garden, soaring the full
12 stories to the skylight roof, was perhaps the most sumptuous lobby in any
Manhattan office building. The placement of the offices along the building's
inside perimeter insured that employees enjoyed, in effect, park views. The
offices themselves, designed by Warren Platner, were a model of "total design,"
with features like telephones integrated into desk tops.

Still, as distinctive as the building clearly was, it nonetheless remained
within the set of values firmly established by the modern movement. The
building's unornamented facade manipulated abstract geometric forms and
displayed to clear advantage the natural beauty of the warm gray granite. The
exposed Cor-Ten steel framing showed an innovative use of new materials and
building technologies while it also expressed the building's structure. The
garden, while imposingly grand, was rationalized on functional grounds as a
"thermal buffer" between the offices and the outdoors.

Formalism, functionalism, technical innovation: these were all established
modern principles. And when they resulted in a building as gorgeous as this one,
it was difficult to dispute their validity. And the validity of modern
architecture was the critical subtext of this building's story. The confidence
that modernism could continue to evolve within an established framework, that
modern architects could innovate without breaking the basic rules: this was as
fundamental to the critical success of the building as any of its individual
features. It affirmed the authority of those who had embraced modern
architecture as a symbol of progressive ideals.

There were those, however, who found visiting the building an unsettling
experience. They had heard it described as a great civic contribution. They had
heard about the garden. They imagined that the city had been endowed with a
spectacular new public space. And this turned out to be grounds for
disappointment. True, the public could enter the building, but the garden, while
visually inviting, was not a comfortable place to be in. There were no chairs,
no benches, no place to sit down. There were steps, but there was also a guard
to make sure you didn't recline on them. There was a brick path, but it was more
inviting to look at than to walk along. You didn't want to linger even if you
were allowed to.

BY ITSELF, THE DISCREPANCY between the image and the reality may not have seemed
like such a big deal. Certainly it did not diminish the building's visual
strength, or the amenity afforded its users. But if you had come to suspect that
the culture in general was suffering from that kind of discrepancy, then the
Ford Foundation was a phenomenon worth pondering. And in fact many people did
have precisely that perception about the culture in general. It was called the
credibility gap.

Initially applied to the less-than-candid rhetoric about the war in Vietnam of
the Lyndon B. Johnson Administration, the term also came to stand for a
pervasive cultural mismatch between rhetoric and reality, image and substance,
word and deed. By 1967, the gap had widened into a chasm. People were eager to
look for the sinister substance lurking behind benign cultural images, whether
it was the enlightened policies of a foundation financed by a car manufacturer,
or the democratic intentions of United States military interventions. Vincent
Scully, the architectural historian, gave voice to that impulse when he referred
ominously to the "military scale" of the Ford Foundation Building's stark
granite facade.

Was this fair? Not if you thought that a building could be detached from its
social context. And yet, many of those who wholeheartedly praised the building
were relying on the implicit meanings it drew from that context.  They just saw
the context in different terms. They saw the liberal tradition of modern
architecture, its historic commitment to social as well as architectural reform.
They regarded modern architecture's acceptance by the establishment as one of
that tradition's great triumphs.

Others, however, perceived that the context had been profoundly altered by that
victory. It meant that modern forms could be used not only to express
progressive social values but also to conceal values that were not at all
progressive. So what? Hasn't architecture always been put to such purposes by
the rich and powerful? Yes, although it isn't the critic's job to help them get
away with it. And modern architecture, after all, had proposed itself as a
departure from that precedent. It upheld an ideology of reform. By 1967, the
moment had come to recognize the extent to which that ideology had become a
mythology, and one alarmingly out of touch with the values it had come to serve.

Yet on a recent visit to the Ford Foundation, I was struck by how luxurious it
was to have this building to criticize. The level of excellence attained by its
design is so vastly superior to today's prevailing standards that I felt like
jumping into a time machine and defending it from its critics, myself among
them.

Nevertheless the issue raised by the criticism is, if anything, more pertinent
now than it was 28 years ago. The difficulty (or futility) of expressing
progressive ideas within the visual language of a traditionally conservative art
form: this predicament is of particularly acute concern to many younger
architects today, who look back to the modern movement as an idealistic Golden
Age of fused social and esthetic conviction. The Ford Foundation Building can't
help them resolve that problem, but it may help them understand it. The building
marks the moment when the fusion came unstuck.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lush Life -- Even though the public is not encouraged to linger
in the glorious garden, the Ford Foundation Building remains, after 25 years, a
benchmark of good design. (Jack Manning/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              66 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

These Boots Apparently Think They're the Energizer Bunny

BYLINE: By JUDITH NEWMAN

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 29;   Column 4;   Style Desk

LENGTH: 1426 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


BEFORE Helen Reddy taught women to roar, before Gloria Gaynor urged them to
survive and way before Cyndi Lauper pointed out, quite sensibly, what girls just
want to have, there was Nancy Sinatra and her boots. Yes, those boots. The ones
that, one of these days, are gonna walk all over you.

And now those boots are walking again. Stomping, even. On April 6, for the first
time in more than 20 years, Nancy Sinatra performed live, at the Playboy mansion
here, where nowadays the bunnies are very much clothed and the grotto is filled
with bath toys, thanks to Hugh Hefner's young sons, Marston and Cooper.

Looking a little like Gloria Steinem as a dominatrix in her black miniskirt and
thigh-high boots, the 54-year-old Ms. Sinatra belted out songs from her new
country-rock album, "One More Time" (Cougar Records), in a voice only slightly
coarsened with the years. By the time she did her final number -- "Boots,"
naturally -- the audience of music industry executives, and even Hef, were
dancing as if it were "Hullabaloo" again.

"What I was doing 25 years ago is what country's doing today," she said in an
interview in a North Hollywood rehearsal studio before the performance. In
choosing country, she may also be heeding advice her father, Frank Sinatra, gave
her years ago when she asked him how to succeed in show business. "Stay away
from what I do," he said. Not that she obeys him entirely: her new album
features her rendition of her father's standby "One for My Baby."

Ms. Sinatra seems intent on resurrection, hoping the second-career lightning
that struck Tony Bennett will strike her next. She doesn't want to be an answer
to a trivia question, a one-tune wonder, the rebel chick with the go-go boots,
miniskirts and hit tune that foot fetishists everywhere hum in their sleep.

So now, she is suddenly everywhere. An album of her greatest hits, including
"Lightning's Girl," "You Only Live Twice" and "Somethin' Stupid," that swoony
yet suggestively incestuous duet with her father, has been available through
Rhino Records for some time, but Sundazed Records has just rereleased four of
her eight original albums. Her love-letter biography, "Frank Sinatra, My Father"
(Doubleday, 1986), is being made into a documentary; she is collaborating on a
coffeetable book, tentatively titled "Frank Sinatra: An American Treasure"; a
1996 pinup calendar of her in all her stilettoed glory will be released in July,
and she will be touring the Northeast in May with material old and new.

Most memorably, she puts herself on frank display in her pictorial for the May
issue of Playboy. "As a feminist, I feel very good about being my age and doing
this," she said. "But I'm with Camille Paglia on this whole issue. Saying
Playboy exploits women is like saying the Metropolitan Museum of Art exploits
women, as far as I'm concerned. What's wrong with beautiful pictures of the nude
female body?"

Behind the bravado, however, is a nice Roman Catholic girl who wanted her
family's blessing. "I was nervous, but my daughters said, 'Go for it, Mom.' "

And her father? She said he gave his blessing, adding, "The only time Dad and I
ever fought was over McGovern vs. Nixon."

In print and on television, Ms. Sinatra can look right out of the House of Wax.
In real life she is far softer and prettier, a petite, delicate-boned woman
dressed, as she was for the interview, in jeans, black T-shirt and the
omnipresent boots. "Hey, they worked for me once," she said with a shrug.

Although she has given up the fake caterpillar lashes, the frosted hairdo
created for her in the 1960's by the hair stylist Kenneth is still with her,
along with the over-the-top eye makeup that on most women her age would look a
little scary -- sort of Donna Reed-meets-Vampira. For a woman not yet ready to
relinquish that sex-kitten image, she is warmly maternal; during rehearsals for
the Playboy mansion performance, she quietly complimented all the musicians and
made sure they were watered and well fed.

But it was the look and the attitude, much more than the voice, that made Ms.
Sinatra a camp icon of the 60's, bridging Petula Clark and Janis Joplin. No less
a fashion maven than Madonna cited Ms. Sinatra as one of her first inspirations.

" 'Boots' was the rebel yell for a generation, and it worked," said George
Wayne, a Vanity Fair columnist and style arbiter. "But more than that, it was
Nancy's heritage, her breeding, that made her special. I mean, here was this
rebel daughter of Ol' Blue Eyes, this legend, making it on her own. Having to
live up to her father's legacy -- can you imagine?"

Is Ms. Sinatra herself nostalgic for that miniskirted bombshell who had
13-year-olds doing the boogaloo? "Absolutely not," she said, laughing. "I have
an affection for her -- for it -- but I'm happy to be where I am right now."

So where has she been for the last 20 years? After marrying the producer Hugh
Lambert (her first marriage was to the teen pop idol Tommy Sands), Ms. Sinatra
quit performing and spent the ensuing years quietly raising their two daughters.
Nine years ago Mr. Lambert died of cancer, and over the next few years she began
to reassess her life. She is active in California politics, most recently
campaigning hard for Dianne Feinstein in the 1994 senatorial race. But with her
daughters off to college, Ms. Sinatra decided it was time to move on.

"I always thought if I learned a trade, I'd be all right," said Ms. Sinatra, who
as a teen-ager attended secretarial school. "But I would have made a lousy
secretary. Performing is the one thing I know how to do."

In May 1994, she met Hal Lifson, a former advertising executive and consultant
to Rhino Records, who is now her manager and whom she credits with engineering
her comeback. His timing seemed right, and not just because of the continuing
cultural cachet of "Boots," which Robert Altman used on the soundtrack of his
movie "Ready to Wear" last year. (More ominously, the F.B.I. chose to make
"Boots" one of the key weapons in its 1993 showdown with the Branch Davidians
near Waco, Tex., playing it aggressively over loudspeakers.)

Mr. Lifson, who plopped down uninvited in the middle of the interview, is a
tummler who rolls words like "marketing strategy" and "visual presentation"
around in his mouth as if they were gumdrops; his main role seems to be to make
Ms. Sinatra, who tends to be a brooder, lighten up.

When a reporter asked her if she was nervous performing again after all these
years, Mr. Lifson cut in with, "Does the word 'Xanax' mean anything to you?" Ms.
Sinatra chortled and nudged him in the ribs.

The only time Mr. Lifson stopped joking was when she coyly refused to discuss
her current love life. When she said she didn't really have time for romance, he
shot her a look of longing. Later, when pressed, she admitted that she and the
34-year-old Mr. Lifson were "dating," although she said she worried that he may
love "the 60's me" and not the person he knows today. "But I really don't think
age difference matters," she added quickly. "Why should women feel intimidated
about being with men younger than they are?"

Despite Mr. Lifson's the-sky's-the-limit prediction for Ms. Sinatra's comeback,
one thing you won't see her trying to revive is her movie career. "I was pretty
bad," admitted the star of such B classics as "Speedway," in which she played a
tax agent chasing Elvis Presley, and "The Wild Angels," the Roger Corman biker
classic starring Bruce Dern, Diane Ladd and a pre-"Easy Rider" Peter Fonda. At
the mere mention of "The Wild Angels," the sultry lidded eyes widened in horror.
"Isn't that the one where we prop up Bruce Dern's dead body in a church, and we
leave him there, smoking a joint?" She shuddered.

Unlike other elder statesmen (and women) of music who label much of today's
popular music soulless, Ms. Sinatra embraces it, sometimes passionately. She
said she loves Hole, Green Day and Tracy Chapman; she is even planning a "duets"
album of her own, singing with various alternative-rock bands. "I know there's
stuff on my album my girls love," she said, "and not just because I'm their
mother."

With the mention of her daughters, A. J. and Amanda, the serious, thoughtful Ms.
Sinatra became animated, suddenly seeming as eager to talk about her children's
future as her own. "They both sing beautifully," she said, "but I'm not going to
give their tapes to anyone I know in the music industry until they finish
college."

"Besides," she added, "I don't know if the world is ready for more Sinatras."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nancy Sinatra, suddenly everywhere: above, after a performance
in Los Angeles, and right, as a cover girl. (Mojgan B. Azimi for The New York
Times) (pg. 29); Nancy Sinatra in a performance for the Army's First Infantry
Division in South Vietnam in 1967. (United Press International) (pg. 32)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              67 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
Second-Best Killer of the Week

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 11;   Column 2;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


If I had to choose a favorite killer of the week, give me the teen-age girl who
bludgeoned her mother with a lead-crystal candlestick holder and got turned away
from Harvard. Not the man who mastered number-crunching at the Harvard Business
School and later took his charts to Washington, where he used them to prolong a
war whose body count totaled 58,000 American and some 3 million Vietnamese
lives.

Robert McNamara says that he has published his book now to combat the "cynicism"
threatening the relationship between Americans and their leaders. He's right in
one respect: Cynicism about this country's institutions, political and
otherwise, knows few bounds. When the news spread a week ago that Harvard had
reversed its decision to admit Gina Grant, a star student who had not revealed
her crime or court-adjudicated punishment on her admissions application, public
sentiment instantly favored Ms. Grant, not Harvard. That's Mr. McNamara's
legacy.

But far from ending such cynicism, his disingenuous memoir will compound it.
Even as the man quotes Aeschylus and appears as a teary tragic figure in prime
time, his words tell us that the contrition is a pose and that he has learned
nothing.

The "eleven major causes for our disaster in Vietnam" he lists in his own
Defense Department's bureaucratese at his book's conclusion -- misjudging the
adversary, misinforming the public, and so on -- could have been recited by any
half-stoned, draft-eligible undergraduate well before Mr. McNamara left office.
The real wisdom he might finally have attained -- a recognition that he was
wrong not to announce his mid-war about-face and quit the Johnson Cabinet when
lives might still have been saved -- eludes him.

"Some said I should have used [my power] by resigning, challenging the
President's Vietnam policy, and leading those who sought to force a change," he
writes. "I believe that would have been a violation of my responsibility to the
President and my oath to uphold the Constitution."

Since Mr. McNamara is so fond of drawing analogies between his Vietnam War
policy and his experience fighting Nazi aggression in World War II, perhaps it's
fair to ask: Would his rationale for refusing to break publicly with an immoral
war policy have flown at Nuremberg? When an exasperated Ted Koppel pressed him
Thursday night on his "moral obligation" to speak out when thousands were dying
in Vietnam, Mr. McNamara ducked the question, then changed the subject, shutting
off serious debate now just as he did then. David Halberstam's judgment of 1972
in "The Best and the Brightest" -- that Mr. McNamara was guilty of "perhaps too
much loyalty, the corporate-mentality loyalty to the office instead of to
himself" -- hardly need be altered today.

A judgment about Gina Grant and her right to a Harvard education is far harder
to come by; too much of her story is a matter of rumor and opinion, not
testimony and fact. But this much is clear. Unlike Mr. McNamara, she did face a
judge and was punished for a crime that, like the Vietnam War, may have been
committed in at least theoretical self-defense. Nor is Ms. Grant telling her
story in print in a bid for money and sympathy -- or making the rounds of media
self-promotion -- as Mr. McNamara is.

In exchange for her dignified silence, she got no rewards, only a smear campaign
by Harvard admissions committee members who refused to give her a hearing but
who, under the cloak of anonymity, fed unsubstantiated evidence against her to
The Harvard Crimson and Boston Globe. Mr. McNamara's public moral plea
bargaining, meanwhile, has earned him brownie points for his "guts" in Newsweek,
not to mention nearly twice as many copies of his book in print as there are
names on the wall in Washington.

If Bill Clinton had guts, he wouldn't just endorse Mr. McNamara's sham apology
to vindicate his own anti-war protest but would mount the bully pulpit on behalf
of those who risked their futures by resisting the draft, and those who fought
and died in innocent perpetration of the policy that, unbeknownst to them, the
Secretary of Defense considered a mistake. But given that the Clintons were Mr.
McNamara's Vineyard house guests the summer after the '92 election, who
seriously thinks he will do so? We're all cynics now.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              68 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Capital T-Shirt Sellers Get Eviction Notices

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


A free speech loophole has provided many of the tourists that parade past this
city's monuments every day an extra treat: three T-shirts for $10.

But officials of the National Park Service are not amused. They think the the
monumental flea market that has grown up in recent years around the sale of
souvenir T-shirts around the city's monuments has created a shopping mall
atmosphere, and they are going to put a stop to it.

The Park Service has issued new rules that will ban the sale of T-shirts on
Federal park land here, beginning on May 8.

T-shirt hawkers have established a 24-hour business by taking advantage of a
rule that allows such sales by anyone claiming to be exercising their First
Amendment right to advocate a cause.

The Park Service said applications for free permits to engage in such sales have
grown to "unprecedented numbers" along the National Mall, the park strip that
runs 21 blocks from the Capitol to the Washington Monument and the Lincoln
Memorial.

The permit system was established to allow T-shirt sales in support of a cause
at one-time events, permitting demonstrators to help defray their costs. But
after the dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, some veterans' groups
began turning one-day demonstrations into 24-hour vigils, and their T-shirt
sales continued, too.

The veterans' groups, stationed between the Lincoln Memorial and Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, appear to have held to the regulations' spirit. But many
other vendors saw a broader opportunity. They began to simply sell Washington
souvenir shirts stamped with a small "D.C. 51st State," which they say
represents support for a proposal to grant statehood to the District of
Columbia.

"We had innumerable complaints from visitors who expected to see the monuments
and memorials without T-shirt stands," said Sandra Alley, a Park Service
spokeswoman. One complaint said T-shirts with images of the MTV cartoon
characters Beavis and Butt-head were being sold.

"T-shirt vendors encircling our most cherished national monuments have created
an air of runaway commercialism and a flea market atmosphere on the National
Mall," said George T. Frampton Jr., an Assistant Secretary of the Interior. "It
is clear that the T-shirt displays and hawking occurring on a daily basis near
frequently visited memorials substantially diminish and impair the park
visitors' experience, as well as harm other park resources."

The new policy limits sales on Federal park land within the District to books,
newspapers, pamphlets, buttons and bumper stickers. It also revises the rules
governing sales booths or tables, limiting their size.

Larry Bice, a Vietnam veteran who helps to run a booth called the Last Firebase,
said he expects his group to challenge the rules, which would bar the veterans'
T-shirt sales with all the others.

"There's been a concerted effort by the Parks Department to get rid of us, it's
very obvious," he said.  "Look at our shirts. If we were here to gouge the
public, we'd be charging $15 instead of $10 or $11. We'd be selling shirts with
dinosaurs on them because that's what sells.

"They call us vendors. I guarantee you when it's 18 degrees and the wind chill
is 10 below, somebody's at this booth -- and we don't make $20 in a day. But you
don't know when a distressed vet from Iowa is going to pass through."

Near dusk on an overcast evening earlier this week, two vendors -- Warren Gaskin
and Charles Johnson -- scrambled to secure their tables near the largely
deserted Washington Monument in a gathering storm. As strong winds ripped
through the flags that ring the obelisk, blue tarps pinned down over other empty
sales tables with cinder blocks fought to break free and take flight.

Most of the tables were abandoned, but Mr. Gaskin said he would probably sleep
beneath his, as he often does, to secure his prime spot.

Other vendors frequently pay the homeless to sleep at their tables and keep
guard, National Park Service employees said.

Mr. Gaskin said tourists like the convenience of being able to buy a souvenir
while they visit the national memorials.

"They ain't from D.C.," he added. "When they get on their tour bus, where are
they going to get T-shirts? They should create licenses you have to pay for.
Everybody's got a family. You've got to make some type of money."

Mr. Johnson agreed. "I'm trying to do something legit," he said. "I ain't out
there selling no drugs. I think they're doing this because they're not making
any revenue off of us."

Mr. Bice said the Last Firebase would remain active, selling its other wares,
including books and bracelets.

Mr. Gaskin said he plans to apply and pay for a street vendor permit and move
his tables when the new rule takes effect. Mr. Johnson said he would probably
move to Phoenix and go back to being a cook.


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The National Park Service says T-shirt vendors are using a
loophole in rules on commercial activities to turn the National Mall into a
shopping mall and plans to ban T-shirt sales beginning on May 8. Moses Bogle
folded a shirt at his booth last week. (Amy Toensing for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              69 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

McNamara's Retreat

BYLINE: By Max Frankel;   Max Frankel, a columnist for The New York Times
Magazine and a former executive editor of The Times, was a Washington
correspondent covering diplomacy and the White House in the 1960's.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1962 words



IN RETROSPECT
The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam.
By Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
Illustrated. 414 pp. New York:
Times Books/Random House. $27.50.

IN his 79th year, Robert S. McNamara at long last offers the public a glimpse of
his aching conscience. The most willful Vietnam warrior in the Kennedy and
Johnson Administrations, he was also the first at the top to admit defeat, in
private. He then stood silent on the war for a quarter-century and drowned his
sorrow in good works at the World Bank. Mr. McNamara personified the slow
maturing of America's foreign policy from cocky interventionism to
cost-conscious realism, yet for a generation he refused to explain his
conversion, explore his mistakes, judge his colleagues or instruct posterity.
The pain, or the guilt, was simply too great. As he states in the preface to "In
Retrospect": "This is the book I planned never to write."

Until now, he contends, the story of how "the best and the brightest" got it
wrong in Vietnam has not been told. But David Halberstam, who applied that
ironic phrase to his rendering of the tale 23 years ago, told it better in many
ways than Mr. McNamara does now. So, too, did the Pentagon Papers, that huge
trove of documents assembled at Mr. McNamara's behest when he first recognized a
debt to history. The contemporary analyses in the papers, which were leaked to
The Times in 1971, stand up so well that they now serve their patron as a major
source.

What Mr. McNamara adds to the public record are some White House documents and
tape transcripts revealing, most notably, his own agonized attempts in 1967 to
persuade President Lyndon B. Johnson to stop sending more men to the slaughter:
the Secretary of Defense who had come to tame the Pentagon with managerial
wizardry ended up desperately begging for a fig leaf for withdrawal, in the form
of a coalition that would inevitably give the Vietcong dominance in Saigon. Mr.
McNamara says he does not know to this day whether he thus quit or was fired.
"Maybe it was both."

But he left with a whimper, not a bang. So why speak out now? The main reason,
he says, is that he has "grown sick at heart witnessing the cynicism and even
contempt" with which so many Americans view their institutions and leaders. He
knows how much Vietnam contributed to that disaffection; he would never deny the
war's terrible damage. But he hopes to prove that the mistakes were "mostly
honest," even if traceable to a ghastly ignorance of the Vietnamese people,
culture and terrain, and the historical forces of that time.

Why should the rest of us relive his agony? Mr. McNamara, characteristically
statistical, points to "11 major causes for our disaster in Vietnam" in a
chapter called "The Lessons of Vietnam." But implicitly his book screams another
lesson: Though cynicism and contempt for power are destructive of government, a
respectful skepticism is essential, and rarely wrong.

BY delaying his war memoir so long, Mr. McNamara has greatly compounded the
difficulty of his mission. Now that the Soviet Union lies in ruins and American
corporations beg for business in China and Vietnam, no one under the age of 50
can be expected to fathom the fears and phobias of the 1960's to which he
rightly ascribes the Indochina disaster. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, the
most venerated American of the time, had taught -- and the Kennedy and Johnson
teams never dared to doubt in time -- that if South Vietnam was "lost" to
Communism, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Malaysia would fall like dominoes,
imperiling India, Burma, Indonesia and the Philippines, if not also Japan, and
emboldening the Russians and Chinese to extend Communist conquests by military
force or subversion in ways that would sooner or later provoke a nuclear World
War III, the very destruction of civilization.

Yes, that is how America's leaders spoke to each other and, all too
persuasively, to the public. Mr. McNamara's book reminds us that they even
repeated the litany in memos to their Presidents, to inoculate them against any
temptation to retreat from Vietnam. And if all those dominoes were not cause
enough, there were promises to be kept in order to preserve the value of
America's other diplomatic threats and commitments.

Mr. McNamara and his generation came to power convinced that the "appeasement"
of Nazi Germany -- the failure to block its early grasp for Europe's dominoes --
had led inevitably to a catastrophic World War II. Averting another such
disaster, they were sure, required punishing anything resembling Communist
aggression in its earliest stages, when the cost would be tolerable. That was
their creed as they rebuilt Western Europe and stood toe to toe with the Soviet
armies across Germany, fought to a bloody stalemate against China in Korea,
threatened war over Berlin and risked war to force Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
Thus "contained," the Soviets and Chinese took to endorsing "wars of
liberation," thereby qualifying even distant uprisings as threats to American
security. Mr. McNamara's first assignment from President John F. Kennedy was to
augment America's nuclear power, whose use was unimaginable, with the forces and
weapons they were sure would be needed to fight "conventional" wars.

From this bed of doctrine grew what Mr. McNamara considers his team's most
fateful error: mistaking Ho Chi Minh's nationalist drive to unite Vietnam as the
challenge of a monolithic Communist world. That misjudgment foreclosed any
discussion of how an American withdrawal from Indochina could be made
strategically tolerable. It even prevented analysis, before the plunge, of how
high a price the commitment was worth. Mr. McNamara's dry rendering of those
fateful tenets of containment fails to convey the passion with which they were
embraced. And he mostly ignores their powerful resonance in domestic politics.

Kennedy, no less than Johnson, subscribed to these simplistic doctrines and the
misjudgments they inspired, even though Mr. McNamara, without persuasive
evidence, deems it "highly probable" that Kennedy would have pulled back from
massive intervention in a second term. This presumes that had Kennedy lived, the
same cast of senior officials would have avoided what Mr. McNamara describes as
a second tier of error: the failure to live by the mantra that the battle in
Vietnam was political, a fight for the "hearts and minds" of an abused
peasantry, and that Americans could assist but never supplant the South
Vietnamese.

In this pew, Mr. McNamara himself was a prominent sinner. His can-do spirit
found no mission impossible, even as Saigon's governments and armies crumbled.
His domineering intellect and predilection for systems analysis made him a
pathetic victim of erroneous and deceptive military audits of bodies counted,
weapons captured, sorties flown, supply lines ruptured. Soon enough, as the
press decided, it became "McNamara's war," and certainly America's.

Mr. McNamara deplores the absence of political advice from old Asia hands who
had been driven from Government service in the McCarthy purges. But as he proves
again in this memoir, he did not easily integrate political wisdom and intuition
into his analyses. Even in retrospect, he does not associate the drift into war
in Vietnam with the Republican taunts that Democrats had "lost" China to
Communism. (Kennedy was afraid to recognize not only China but even Outer
Mongolia!) Mr. McNamara cannot bring himself to believe that the election
calendar affected Johnson's willingness to escalate the war in 1965 but not in
1964 or, as Johnson eventually confessed to Doris Kearns, that he stayed the
course in Asia because he feared losing effectiveness at home -- like Truman
after the "loss" of China -- as much as he feared the repercussions of defeat
abroad.

Finally, Mr. McNamara recounts a third tier of error -- an escalating pattern of
military misjudgment. He is hard on the Joint Chiefs of Staff for their
misplaced optimism in the early years, their always excessive faith in high-tech
weapons and their later expectations that massive bombing and frontal battles
could wear down the Vietnamese enemy. He is remiss in not fully rebutting the
postwar claims that timid civilians had tied the military's hands with
unreasonable limits on troop commitments and bombing targets. Mr. McNamara
emphasizes how little was accomplished by bombings heavier even than those in
World War II. And he explains Johnson's caution in target selection by recalling
the fear that a more rapid escalation could provoke Chinese intervention. But
Americans who cannot accept David's triumph over Goliath draw more belligerent
"lessons" from this history, which Mr. McNamara should have engaged more
directly.

Even more disappointing is Mr. McNamara's unwillingness to explore the human
tragedies and political legacies of this longest American war. What was it like
to send tens of thousands to their deaths in an increasingly dubious cause? How
did the strain affect the men in charge? We get a glimpse of Jacqueline Kennedy
beating him on the chest in protest against the war, and of angry insults hurled
on the ski slopes, but no real introspection. Mr. McNamara says the war tore
deeply at his own family, but quickly adds: "I am not comfortable speaking in
such terms."

What then of the political legacy? How, without growing cynical, can citizens
protect themselves against the stubborn ignorance and misplaced zeal of their
leaders? In the darkest days, Mr. McNamara remembers, he watched the
demonstrators from his Pentagon window and insisted that his subordinates show
respect for the freedoms of speech and assembly. But he took refuge -- and takes
it even now -- in opinion polls that recorded support from the majority of
Americans who, as he well knew, had been misinformed and denied vital
information at every major turn.

"Looking back," he writes, "I clearly erred by not forcing . . . a knock-down,
drag-out debate over the loose assumptions, unasked questions and thin analyses
underlying our military strategy in Vietnam. I had spent 20 years as a manager
identifying problems and forcing organizations -- often against their will -- to
think deeply and realistically about alternative courses of action and their
consequences. I doubt I will ever fully understand why I did not do so here."

YET even now Mr. McNamara means he should have stirred debate only inside the
small circle of Presidential counselors led by himself, Secretary of State Dean
Rusk and McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser (later succeeded by Walt
Rostow). Mr. McNamara blames Johnson for going to war furtively, with no regard
for the rights of Congress and the public, but he rejects any obligation to
resign in protest or, once out of office, to share his policy disagreements with
the country. Cabinet officers, he contends, should have a constituency of one:
the President -- from whom they derive all authority and through whom alone they
can be held accountable.

That is surely the right ethic for normal times. Unelected officials should not
steal their President's mandate to pursue an independent course. But a thousand
dead Americans a month create their own constituency. Even military discipline
admits a higher duty than hierarchical loyalty when power is badly used and puts
lives at risk.

Mr. McNamara relieved his private turmoil by reading poetry, and shared his
misgivings with Robert F. Kennedy and a few other intimates. But he refused to
abandon or attack the President whom he had helped to guide into quicksand. He
and Johnson "loved and respected" each other, in a bond that even now, in
retrospect, keeps the public at a distance looking on, with skepticism, I hope.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              70 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENCOUNTERS;
A Summation From the Patron Saint of Sociology

BYLINE: By ERIKA DUNCAN;   Erika Duncan is a novelist and essayist who lives in
Sag Harbor.

SECTION: Section 13LI;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 3072 words


IT was a strange project, trying to make a portrait of the man who had coined
the notion of "Obliteration by Incorporation," an important concept in the
Sociology of Science that Robert Merton had fathered. In the accumulation of
scientific knowledge, where each discovery expands or alters some part of the
whole, the sources of those discoveries are often obliterated from the
collective memory.

The organizational structure of science itself, the fact that peer recognition
of significant originality is the basic reward, made for strange contradictions
between the stated communality -- that discoveries become public property -- and
the often fierce battles for priority.

As one penetrated Merton's work, the romanticized picture of the driven
individual scientist would fade as the larger dynamic took over, self-creating
and ever changing, yet trapped also within its own fixtures -- so that his
Newton, his Leibniz and his Hooke seemed to operate in a place more expansive
than that which we've known.

I did not know much of his work when I came, but I did know that the
"Self-Fulfilling Prophecy" was his. I would soon learn that even in his early
20's, while he was a doctoral student at Harvard investigating the relationship
between Puritanism and the development of science, unbeknownst to himself at the
time, he was mapping in a not so tentative form ideas that have become part of
the bedrock of modern sociology, as well as the basis for his own more than five
decades of work.

From that earliest jump from "The Unintended Consequences of Social Action" to
its offshoot in "The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy," in his need to define precisely
what he was trying to isolate, he would already be coining concepts and terms
that would find their way into the everyday vernacular. I would learn that the
concept of the "role model" was his, developed in the 1950's, when he and his
associates were studying the relationship of medical students to their mentors,
where the emulation of the specific role became more important than the
emulation of the total person.

The focused group interview -- now known as the "focus group" -- was his and his
associates', and there was the now ubiquitous triadic title "Science, Technology
and Society" -- given to his Ph.D. monograph -- now dotting university
departments worldwide.

"Have you ever failed at this sort of interview?" he asked as he ushered me into
his study, where a small three-quarters rectangle of computer tables and files
formed a safe-feeling enclosure within the larger mostly empty space -- a
transparency out of Chartres, the apostles on the shoulders of the prophets, on
the part of the table where he writes, a poster of Lewis Carroll and Alice on
the floor.

Beyond the rectangle, one had the feeling of abundant sunlight and even of
entering sky. His books would begin in a separate corridor affectionately dubbed
Scholar's Alley, designed by an East Hampton builder, Ben Krupinski, its entry
lighted through blocks of frosted glass, with portraits of his 17th-century
companions Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke, his beloved Christopher Wren and
Newton on top of the shelves.

When he first moved to East Hampton, 10 years ago, he lived in the Northwest
Woods, but he needed more sky.

It was a playfulness and a modesty I felt about Robert Merton first.

"I've managed to keep a fairly low profile for my first 85 years and I would
like to keep it that way," he said, even as he rose to his full, rather
extraordinary, height, telling a story about the time when he was photographed
with President Clinton while receiving the National Medal of Science in December
-- the first time that the award was given to a sociologist. "Mr. President, I
had no idea that you were as tall as you are," he had said as they waited in the
empty space for the camera to be clicked. "I'm pretty tall myself. I'm 6 feet
tall. You must be at least 2 inches taller."

To which the President replied, "Yes, but when I first came into the Oval
Office, I was more like 6 feet 8."

My mind wandered. Along with the sociological tome "Social Theory and Social
Structure," which contains famous essays on "anomie" and "manifest and latent
functions," Robert Merton had given me his delightful literary book "On the
Shoulders of Giants," based on the debates over priority that have dotted the
history of science -- pinpointing the tension between erudition and originality
in science -- but all embodied in the search for the sources, variations and
bowdlerizations of the single salient aphorism, claimed by Newton's followers to
be Newton's own, "If I have seen farther, it is by standing on the shoulders of
giants."

I had wandered into a world of stop-starting, false starts and multiplications
of instances in which the humanist lover of language and thought and the
scientist were joined.

This book with its digressions and mischievous glosses upon its own thought
processes was begun as a letter and then gradually, around page 4, seemed to
take on the voice of Lawrence Sterne's "Tristram Shandy," a book that Merton had
often turned to in his own times of melancholy. From the moment that Merton
recognized the Shandean echo he was hooked. For some four weeks in a winter
intersession he did not leave his study at all, but had food sent to him, as he
allowed himself the luxury of digression, intellectual and humorous play.

The 300-page letter was never intended for publication, but somehow it was
dittoed. "Three or four years later I received a phone call from an author who
was writing a biography of Francis Bacon and had read that letter. She asked
about the 17th-century Fat Tom Sprat, more widely known as Bishop Sprat, who had
written the 'History of the Royal Society.' 'I am reading your manuscript aloud
to my husband, and we find it uproarious,' she said. You must publish it.'

"I will, if you will write the introduction."

The book came into being quietly, in 1965, only to be republished in a
20th-anniversary edition and to have a further revival in 1991, when it excited
the attention of the novelist and semiotician Umberto Eco, who wrote the
foreword for the Italian edition; of the critic Denis Donoghue, who did the
afterword (post-Italianate), and of Stephen Jay Gould, the paleontologist, who
made it the cause for a long essay, discourse spawning discourse, its subject
and result.

At 85, Robert Merton speaks quietly. He is in the process of writing 45 papers,
which are largely elaborations of ideas in the sociology of science. Over and
over again he would refer to his lifelong "amnesia," the fact that his memory is
episodic, to what seems to him a distressing extent. I would notice his distress
about his memory, even as I myself marveled at its encyclopedic quality, at its
marvelous width.

But perhaps there was something in the irregular and syncopated way in which he
allowed himself to think that made way for what was truly important. I would
notice, in the short time that we were talking, that as we spoke he would put a
gloss on his thought processes with asides like, "I know I am apparently
wandering, but I won't commit infanticide on my thoughts.

"I've never felt moved to go to the Sage of Vienna to find out about my
amnesia," he remarked. Interestingly, he easily remembers the details of the
research on Nobel prize-winning scientists by his wife and colleague, Harriet
Zuckerman.

With a charm I would come to know as characteristic he tells me that often when
he is developing a "new" set of ideas his wife reads over the pages and reminds
him that he had written them almost verbatim, sometimes decades ago.

And then, sure enough, he will find them, much as he is writing them now -- but
at that time unready yet to bear fruit.

As I read about the Nobel Prize-winning scientists, there was something that
struck me in the patience of the truly great mind to wait for an important
problem, a comfort with that period when nothing big had clearly yet imprinted
itself on the screen.

For it is possible to be waylaid for years, decades even, by problems that are
inconsequential. I watch as Robert Merton speaks to me and reasons. He has made
much of the way people waste enormous effort in trying to explain assumed
phenomena.

"In the abstract it need hardly be said that before one proceeds to explain a
phenomenon it is advisable to establish that the phenomenon actually exists. Yet
sometimes in science, as often in everyday life, explanations are provided of
matters that are not and never were."

At first it is frightening. Then it grows exciting. How quickly he will dismiss
a formulation I make when it seems to be based on a false lead -- that in turn
engenders a whole false hypothesis -- about what he is up to.  "It is as if I am
driven by a curiosity which I can't explain, what I would later describe as a
strategic research site, a sort of seedbed, understood only in retrospect," he
says when I ask him about his own process.

At times he speaks slowly, commenting every now and again on the manner of his
own speaking.

"I'm deliberately not overcritical for a time. I don't engage in mental
infanticide, but let the idea pressing for attention take shape. I give it
enough rope. I have to discover what the rope is.

"It's a strange phenomenon, this tacit theorizing about aspects of social
reality before you know what it is that you are looking for. It starts as a
vague notion and sometimes ends in nothing. But every so often, the tacit
becomes explicit and leads to new problems worth pursuing."

There is control at first in his speech, but as he approaches the movement
toward closure his words seem to vanish, until he has arrived at the ultimate
condensation that he describes as "the paradigmatic essay."

There is a chart in his much reprinted 1938 essay on anomie that delineates the
range of responses to class, ethnic and sexual constraints on opportunity in a
society that declares itself based on equal opportunity for all that he shows me
by way of example. For it is the search for a paradigmatic form that makes
implications identifiable and transmittable. His work is meant to be used.

Because he does not always arrive to the point that he refers to as adequate
closure, a substantial part of Robert Merton's work remains unpublished. There
are six books that have never been published, every one a case of joint
authorship.

"I'm not proud of this refusal to publish," he said. "I feel that in some cases
I've erred in doing so, and thus punished my co-authors."

In the sciences there are millions of articles, the greater part of them little
or never put to use by other scientists. Yet articles that he published 20, 30,
40 years ago are read and studied, not as antiquities, but as works of renewed
relevance.

There is, even when the work has gone well, characteristically a very long time,
sometimes 10 or 15 years or more, between the first formulation of a concept in
oral publication -- given in a public presentation -- and the printed version.

He digresses for a minute to tell how he called Thomas Kuhn to the Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences in Palo Alto, Calif., that he had
helped found, so that outstanding scholars working in every phase of the social
and behavioral sciences might have a year without any specific project
requirement, "brought together to interact in unpredictable and fruitful
fashion."

Even as Robert Merton tells of how Kuhn, then unknown, came up quite
independently with his important notion of the paradigm, I am thinking in
Mertonian terms. I am thinking of what he calls "multiples," the ideas or
discoveries made independently and sometimes simultaneously.

I am thinking, too, about his own choice for his doctoral thesis of the rise of
science in the 17th century; also about the concept of the "strategic research
site" exemplified in Morgan's use of the fruit fly -- so "easily and cheaply
bred in the laboratory" -- that demonstrated the importance of the gene in the
physical basis of heredity. I am thinking of the way Robert Merton explores
Marx's choice of England and Freud's choice of seemingly trivial mistakes in
everyday life like slips of the tongue as strategic research sites.

As Robert Merton talks I feel his love for sociology is great. I also feel his
patience with it is great. "The expectations and demands made on the field are
absurd," he tells me with affection. "Now suppose the English had turned to
Harvey in 1655, when he was studying the circulation of the blood, and faulted
him because he wasn't working to prevent coronary thrombosis.

"Because war and exploitation and poverty and racial discrimination and
psychological insecurity plague modern societies," great demands are put on
social scientists for solutions, he had pointed out in his seminal texts on the
nature of sociology, even as he urged patience with the levels of exploration
that could provide no immediate yield.

For "if everyone backs only the sure thing, who will support the colt yet to
come into its own?"

He advocates the development of what he calls "theories of the middle range,"
neither too all-encompassing nor too focused on immediate application -- so that
theoretical advances and practical contributions could be made without one
shortchanging the other.

He would speak movingly about prisons, about "the evidence we have that prisons
are largely colleges of crime, yet more and more prisons are built as the
would-be solution to rising rates of crime." He would speak of "the agony of
working within social systems that resist or reject the slender knowledge we do
have."

He would show me the petition he and his students sent to President Richard M.
Nixon during his Columbia teaching days to protest the Vietnam War. He would
talk about the G.I. Bill, which had enabled so many of his students, the first
in their families, to go to college, "that 30-year flow of talent," as an
example of immensely consequential social legislation.

And then he would stop and speak about his own times of depression.  He would
speak about how as a young romantic he had not really expected to live beyond
35, "remember Byron, Keats and Shelley," so that he considers these last 50
years as a sort of bonus.

But when he was working well -- for I had asked him, "Was he relaxed or driven,
when he was working?" already knowing the answer -- he was completely relaxed.
"When the work is going well," he said, "the relaxation is total. I'm wholly
involved, and everything else becomes extraneous. These are very special times."

And perhaps not so strangely, whenever I would read Robert Merton's work, I,
too, would feel totally relaxed, totally engaged in the easily flowing rhythms
of intellectual search itself, which would blot out those moments of darkness
and thinking of self.

Robert Merton was born into the immigrant community of South Philadelphia. He
read omnivorously from the age of 5 or 6 in the nearby Carnegie Library. His
mother was what he described as "a self-educated philosophical anarchist" and
was the most important person in his life.

For a moment he tells me about how he heard at the age of 7 or 8 of Prince
Kropotkin, the anarchist dreamer, "long before other youngsters would have known
he existed," from the nearby German shoemaker who used to talk to him while he
sat waiting for the family's shoes to be repaired.

I had asked him what he thought it meant that as a 12-year-old boy he had
studied the art of magic quite seriously, learning it from Charles (Hop)
Hopkins, the husband of his only sister, and giving frequent performances for
neighborhood children. "As a youngster, I was incredibly shy," he said slowly.
"By the time Hop had me performing that had completely changed."

He thought for a minute. "I took great pleasure in the way in which texts of
magic were presented. As I have since come to realize they were as clearly
organized as papers in science. First there is 'the effect,' what the audience
sees. Then the modus operandi. Magic epitomized the gap between appearance and
reality. It led me to see the importance in science of establishing the
phenomenon. And then there is the patter, actually the story line, which led me
to think about the nature of communication in affecting perception."

And now suddenly he couldn't be stopped. He was talking much faster than I could
write, much faster than I could listen, as he told me about being fascinated
when he was a freshman at Temple College by these themes as they came up in
schools of philosophy. "Perhaps I'm inventing.  But the fact that these
tentative ideas have emerged so quickly suggests that much more may be there.
I'll probably wake up in the middle of the night and write myself a tentative
'Nightthought,' as I often do."

At Temple he drifted into a class in sociology being taught by a young
instructor -- "I was 17, he was just six or seven years older" -- and thought as
he read one of the early textbooks, "If this is sociology I want no part of it."
Back then many sociologists were ministers or children of the clergy. Their work
was not so much theological as sentimental.

He entered graduate school at Harvard at a time when sociology was belatedly
established there and made the further deviation from what was expected by
asking the pioneering historian of science, George Sarton, father of the poet
May Sarton, whether he might study with him. Merton began his graduate work in
the throes of the Depression. But in what he would describe later as a
"threshold gift" his mentor "provided the functional equivalent of a publishing
grant from the nonexistent National Science Foundation" and brought into print
his work in the sociology of science.

We wander through talking about his time as "an unruly apprentice" to Sarton and
talk a bit about his experience of effective collaboration, with Paul
Lazarsfeld, father of mass-communications research, and with his wife, Harriet.
He talks for a bit about how it is that in his newer writings for publication,
despite his preference for the paradigmatic form, he is leaving less out.

But suddenly, even in the middle of a sentence, his speaking slowed down. For
the first time, but just for a moment, he began to look his 85 years. "I am
getting tired," he said.  "Did you notice?"

He smiled as he saw me out, and I noticed again his great height.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Merton and part of his Scholar's alley library at his
home in East Hampton. (Pg. 1); Robert Merton, the sociologist, taking a pause at
his home in East Hampton. (Pg. 9) (Michael Shavel for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              71 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Too Late the Phalarope

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


On March 9, 1969, James Reston wrote in his New York Times column:

"The art of resigning on principle from positions close to the top of the
American Government has almost disappeared. Nobody quits now, as Anthony Eden
and Duff Cooper left Neville Chamberlain's Cabinet, with a clear and detailed
explanation of why they couldn't be identified with the policy any longer. . . .
Most, at the critical period of escalation [in Vietnam], gave to the President
the loyalty they owed to the country."

In that prescient comment Reston identified the real issue raised now by Robert
McNamara's book on his role in the Vietnam War. The book is a mea culpa for his
policy, which he says was "wrong, terribly wrong." But Mr. McNamara expresses no
regret for his greater wrong: failing to speak the truth then, when it mattered.

As early as 1965, after the dispatch of U.S. ground forces and the start of
massive bombing, he thought the war "impossible" to win "short of genocidal
destruction." In early 1966 he told reporters off the record that the bombing
campaign would not force Vietnam to end the war. By 1967 he believed that this
country would suffer "a major national disaster" if it did not stop the war.

But Mr. McNamara said none of that in public at the time. And his silence
continued after he left his job as Secretary of Defense in 1968: continued
through seven more bloody years of war.

To speak out, he says in the book, "Would have been a violation of my
responsibility to the President and my oath to uphold the Constitution." His
theory is that the President is the elected national leader in our system;
Cabinet members are solely his creatures, without the independent political
standing they have as elected legislators in a parliamentary system.

Others have taken the same view. James C. Thomson Jr. -- in a 1973 article in
Foreign Policy, "Getting Out and Speaking Out," that is the best single
treatment of the issue -- describes a 1968 appearance at Harvard by McGeorge
Bundy, former national security adviser to the President. Mr. Bundy told the
audience that a President gave his appointee trust and a pistol -- and one who
spoke out critically not only violated the trust but used the pistol to shoot
the President.

But the American Constitution, as Justice Robert H. Jackson once wrote, "is not
a suicide pact." An official who believes that a President's policy is leading
to "a major national disaster," as Mr. McNamara correctly foresaw, surely has a
higher obligation to the country than to the President. That was Reston's point.

Moreover, President Johnson's political legitimacy on issues of the Vietnam War
was weak because he deliberately concealed the truth about the war from the
public that elected him. The McNamara book describes how Johnson instructed
aides to hide the truth about the costs and prospects of the war.

Mr. McNamara offers another defense for his silence. He told Jonathan Alter of
Newsweek that speaking out after he left the Government would not have helped
stop the war: "My voice wouldn't have made any difference."

Can a man as smart as Robert McNamara believe such nonsense? In 1968 opponents
of the war were still being dismissed by many as crazy kids, draft-dodgers,
Communists. It would have made an immense difference if the former Secretary of
Defense had told the truth.

Of course Mr. McNamara was not alone in his silence. As late as 1970, for
example, when Anthony Lake and two others resigned from Henry Kissinger's staff
in the Nixon White House in disagreement with the invasion of Cambodia, they
went without uttering a word of public criticism.

And the tradition of silence continues today. When Congressman Robert Torricelli
disclosed that a Guatemalan colonel involved in the killing of two Americans was
on the payroll of the C.I.A., Newt Gingrich's reaction was to try to force him
off the House Intelligence Committee. Keeping quiet was a higher value than
acting to stop American complicity in murder.

Many have noted that 58,000 Americans and more than 3 million Vietnamese died in
that war while Robert McNamara and many others swallowed their doubts. But the
danger of silence is not limited to the Vietnam War. It is in silence, without
accountability, that democratic governments make their cruelest mistakes.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              72 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Asia Trek Yields Mekong River's Source

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 16


They were 7 men and 14 horses, clambering along riverbeds and across bleak
plains as they headed for their place of magic. They believed that somewhere on
the high plateau, not far from China's border with Tibet, they would discover
the source of the Mekong River, long sought by explorers.

In a century, more than a dozen expeditions had failed to find it.

"The last tents of the nomad herdsmen were far behind us, and we were totally
isolated," said Michel Peissel, the head of the small expedition. "We had found
the sacred spring the tribesmen had pointed to. But that was not the source. The
river went on."

Now above 15,000 feet, the group pushed through mean curtains of hail and
terrifying lightning storms right above their heads. Yellow wolves stalked their
camp. Finally, when the river shrank to a small stream between two mountain
ranges, they climbed the pass where the two ranges met.

"That was it, the end of the line," Mr. Peissel said. "Before us was the
springfield," or source. "It was a marshy field from which water was oozing.
Just below the head of the pass, two rivulets formed and became one."

"We were at the watershed, at 16,300 feet," the explorer went on, now back in
Paris but still exulting at the moment. On the other side of the pass, water
would run down toward the Yangtze River. "Here on the Rup-sa Pass we were
looking at the first trickles of the Mekong."

The Rup-sa Pass, the team said, is the westernmost point, the point farthest
from the sea, from which the Mekong's headwaters surge down. Fed by countless
tributaries, the river swells along its 2,600 miles until, in a hot delta in
Vietnam, it spills into the South China Sea.

"We were all exhilarated," Mr. Peissel recalled. "Even our surly Chinese
companions. The trip had been long and bleak."

The French and British explorers and their Chinese guides had traveled for 13
days through one of the highest and most inhospitable parts of the Central Asian
plateau, the source of five of the continent's greatest rivers: the Yangtze, the
Yellow River, the Mekong, the Irrawaddy and the Salween.

What drove Mr. Peissel and his privately financed expedition here was the belief
that explorers had visited and recorded the sources of four of these mighty
rivers, but no one had pinpointed or claimed to find the exact source of the
Mekong. On the best available atlases, specialists have said, the Mekong's
source is either vaguely indicated or erroneous.

Mr. Peissel, 58, a French ethnologist and writer who has made 24 journeys
through Central Asia and Tibet, made it his goal to complete the missing
information.

For several years he examined old documents and new military maps. Even
satellite images, he argued, did not clarify the exact location and size of the
smaller branches of the river's headwaters.

Geographers say specialists and explorers have long argued over what constitutes
the ultimate source of a major river, above all if it starts as a web of many
small streams. Commonly, the source is considered the branch with the greatest
flow or the branch the farthest from the sea.

"Often a river source has been established by convention," said Bryan Isacks, a
geophysicist at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., who was interviewed by
telephone. "It's a question much asked in the 19th century, in the age of
exploration. It's perhaps more of a curiosity. I'm not sure what significance it
has."

Mr. Isacks, who specializes in the tectonics of the Himalayas, said that the
high plateau of Central Asia "is indeed a part of the earth that is very poorly
mapped."

"In that area there are spots that were never visited by outsiders," he said.

The small expedition set off last September, the rare month in which the high
region is free from snow and ice. On the team, besides Mr. Peissel, were Brian
Guinness, 28, a Briton who speaks Chinese, and Jacques Falck, 38, a French
physician and filmmaker. Four members of the Qinghai Mountaineering Association
joined as escorts at Xining, the capital of the Chinese province of Qinghai.

That barren and windswept region, once part of Tibet, ranks among China's most
inhospitable places. China operated labor camps for "counterrevolutionaries"
there and long closed the area to outsiders.

It took the team and their two vehicles seven days to cross the province,
stopping and starting and getting bogged down in mud and landslides. When the
dirt road finally ran out, they hired horses.

By then, Mr. Peissel said, they were in the old Tibetan kingdom of Nangchen, a
land inhabited for centuries by nomadic Khamba tribes, a tough people who had
remained independent even of the Dalai Lama.

"Most of the tribes still kind of escape Chinese control," said Mr. Peissel, who
likes to refer to his book "The Cavaliers of Kham," in which he describes the
fierce battles between the Chinese and the Khamba horsemen some four decades ago
as China was conquering Tibet.

Along the way, Mr. Peissel said, the landscape still bore signs of warfare,
including destroyed Buddhist monasteries and a large network of Chinese military
garrisons.

As the expedition pressed on, the land became even harsher, covered with little
more than rocks and tough grass chewed on by yaks. Yet surviving on this barren
ground there were gazelles, blue foxes, snow leopards and wild Asian asses.

"One night we lost three of our horses to the wolves," Mr. Peissel said.
Overhead circled great-wingedvultures, and eagles and hawk owls scooped down to
pick out marmots and glacier rats.

The team's biggest obstacle was the wilderness in the sky. Hail squalls hit them
every day, and there were terrifying lightning storms right overhead -- all the
more alarming because on the high plains, the caravan was often the tallest
point around.

"It's bleak and forbidding but a place of great beauty," said Mr. Peissel, who
speaks several Tibetan dialects and calls Tibet and the surrounding highlands
his great passion. "It's not warming, but chilling. It speaks to the soul rather
than to the heart."

On their way along the upper Mekong, which there bears the name Dza-Nak, the
team would stop for advice at the only human dwellings around -- the tents of
nomadic herdsmen.

"The tribesmen kept telling us about the sacred spring," Mr. Peissel said. The
spring proved to be a place that produced a rivulet but was not the river's real
source.

After four days of riding, mapping and taking measurements, the team reached the
Rup-sa Pass and, finally, the point that they believe to be the source of the
Mekong. "It was the 17th of September at 6 o'clock in the afternoon," Mr.
Peissel recalled. "It was still light. This was the highest and the farthest
point of the headwaters. We were all thrilled."

John Hemming, director of the Royal Geographical Society in London, said: "There
are relatively few unexplored areas of the world. To find a source of a river as
important as the Mekong is quite something."

NAME: Michel Peissel

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 19, 1995, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An article on Monday about an expedition to find the source of the Mekong River
misstated the location of the Rup-sa Pass in northwest China in some editions.
It is at the western end of the river, not the eastern end. The article also
misidentified a British member of the expedition. He was Sebastian Guinness, not
Brian Guinness.


GRAPHIC: Photos: The Mekong River leaves the high plateau in Tibet 100 miles
from its source at the Rup-sa Pass. The river runs for 2,600 miles and finally
spills into the South China Sea from a Vietnam delta. Nomads with a caravan of
yaks headed for the nearest monastery to trade their wool. (Sebastian
Guiness/Sipa Press)(pg. A8); Michel Peissel straddling newfound source of the
Mekong River. (Ling/Sipa Press)(pg. A1)

Map of China showing location of the source of the Mekong River. (pg. A8)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              73 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CLINTON REVAMPS POLICY ON SECRECY OF U.S. DOCUMENTS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


President Clinton today signed an executive order overhauling Government secrecy
rules and requiring, with certain exceptions, that even the most highly
classified documents be made public after 25 years.

The directive, issued after two years of debate within the Administration,
establishes the least secretive policy on Government records since the beginning
of the cold war. It would allow the head of an agency, like the Director of
Central Intelligence, to exempt some documents, but only with the approval of an
appeals panel.

The current rules, established in 1947 and last refined by the Reagan
Administration, have allowed vast vaults of documents to be kept classified even
beyond the 30-year period after which they must be surrendered to the National
Archives. Today, Mr. Clinton promised that his order would "lift the veil" on
millions of those documents and keep many new documents from being classified in
the first place.

But he left little doubt that the new rules, spelled out in a 25-page directive,
would still allow the Government to protect the most sensitive of documents from
public disclosure.

In a statement, he said the new policy would "maintain the necessary controls
over information that legitimately needs to be guarded in the interests of
national security."

Administration officials conceded that the new policy was less open than one the
National Security Council proposed a year ago. They said the version reflected
White House efforts to accommodate complaints of officials at the Central
Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon, the National Security Agency and elsewhere,
who have argued vigorously that the automatic release of certain documents would
be foolhardy.

The officials said it was impossible to say precisely how many documents might
ultimately be exempted from Mr. Clinton's order, which is to take effect over
the next five years. They said that would depend in part on how vigorously the
C.I.A. and others strive to protect their secrets.

But the officials said today's step would require that the vast majority of
national security documents be subject to automatic disclosure, opening a
substantial new flow of declassified documents as agencies begin to fulfill a
requirement that they reduce backlogs by at least 15 percent a year. When they
take full effect at the turn of the century, the new rules will have made
available all but exempted information from 1975 and earlier, including millions
of pages related to the Vietnam War.

Steven Aftergood, who directs a project on Government secrecy for the Federation
of Independent Scientists, described Mr. Clinton's directive as representing "a
distinct improvement over the current system."

But Mr. Aftergood, a leading advocate of greater openness, argued that the new
rules would still permit the intelligence agencies to keep unnecessary secrets.
Nothing in Mr. Clinton's order will force the Government to make public the size
of the intelligence budget, Mr. Aftergood noted, even though it is common
knowledge in the capital.

Administration officials said today's directive would allow the Director of
Central Intelligence, the Defense Secretary and other agency heads to protect
any document that revealed information from at least one of nine specified
categories, including the identities of human intelligence sources and the
details of United States war plans still in effect.

But the order requires that all such exemptions be reviewed by an Interagency
Security Classification Appeals Panel, which would have the power to deny or
amend all exemptions. It also authorizes Government employees to make public
even documents eligible for protection if they decide that the public interest
outweighs national security concerns.

The White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, conceded that the overhaul might
not satisfy some historians who have been pressing for swifter and more complete
access to Government documents. But he and the President both portrayed the step
as striking an appropriate balance.

Saying that the Administration would "no longer tolerate the excesses of the
current system," Mr. Clinton said in his statement that he regarded the
directive as a step that would bring secrecy rules "into line with our vision of
American democracy in the post-cold-war world."

Mr. Clinton first promised an overhaul in April 1993, shortly after he took
office. But the process proved more controversial than he or his aides expected
as the C.I.A. and other agencies fought to make it less restrictive while
members of Congress put forward proposals of their own.

Today, Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican who is chairman of the
Senate Intelligence Committee, issued a statement making clear that he shared
Mr. Clinton's concern that too much information has been kept secret through
overclassification.

But Senator Specter indicated that he was reserving judgment about Mr. Clinton's
solution, saying that the intelligence committee would follow closely the
implementation of the directive to determine whether further steps were needed.

Mr. Clinton's order reverses current policy by directing Government officials to
err on the side of openness when weighing whether a document should be
classified in the first place. It would also require the officials to justify
their decisions to designate a document as secret.

But the President chose to maintain the current system of four separate
categories of classification, even though members of Congress have proposed that
they be narrowed to secret and top secret.

At the same time, a senior Administration official was frank in conceding that
several exemptions from the 25-year disclosure requirement had been added to
satisfy particular Government agencies.

Among them is a provision drafted by the National Security Agency that would
protect documents that "reveal information that would impair U.S. cryptologic
systems or activities." A State Department-backed provision would protect
documents that "reveal information that would seriously or demonstrably impair
relations between the United States and a foreign government."

Even the Secret Service weighed in. The official said it had pressed for the
exemption from automatic disclosure of documents that "reveal information that
would clearly and demonstrably impair the current ability of United States
Government officials to protect the President, Vice President, and other
officials for whom protection services, in the interest of national security,
are authorized."


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              74 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Losses on Real Estate Cut Pataki's Taxes Last Year

BYLINE: By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 410 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, April 17


Gov. George E. Pataki earned $121,000 from his law practice and legislative
salary last year, according to tax returns made available today.

But a variety of losses on real-estate holdings and his family farm and
deductions for legislative expenses kept his Federal taxes to $10,398. Mr.
Pataki also paid $4,617 in state taxes.

The Republican Governor reported $55,000 in legal fees, the most he has earned
from his small Peekskill practice in several years. Asked how he did that well
while he was running for governor, Mr. Pataki said about half of the 1994 income
had been billed in 1993. Most of the work was in real estate, he said, but he
declined to identify his clients, citing confidentiality.

Mr. Pataki's salary as a State Senator included $57,291 in base pay and $9,000
for serving as chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee. His salary as Governor
is $130,000.

Mr. Pataki claimed a loss of $32,033 on three residential properties he rented
last year, of which he deducted $14,573 from his income. Those rentals included
a wing of his mansion overlooking the Hudson River in Garrison, the family's
farmhouse in Peekskill and a condominium in Saratoga Springs.

For the first time that he could recall, Mr. Pataki also reported losing money
on the family's vegetable and fruit farm in Peekskill, where he and his wife,
Libby, operate a produce stand. The farm lost $8,017 last year, he reported.

The Governor claimed $6,399 under a special Federal deduction to help state
Legislators defray expenses related to their official duties. The deduction has
been criticized by watchdog groups because lawmakers already receive $89 a day
for their personal expenses and because they may claim the deduction for days
they are not in Albany.

Mr. Pataki claimed the deduction for 73 days last year, although he was eligible
to claim it for 200 days, said Zenia Mucha, his director of communications.

The Governor donated $2,600 to charities last year, including $885 worth of used
clothing to the Salvation Army and more than $300 in corn, cider and other
produce to nonprofit groups representing senior citizens, Vietnam veterans and
artists.

The Governor allowed reporters an hour to inspect his returns today. He did not
release photocopies, although he had criticized his predecessor, Mario M. Cuomo,
for withholding photocopies last year. Ms. Mucha said she was concerned that the
information might be misused for political purposes.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              75 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

OUR TOWNS;
Touring the Glories of Newark

BYLINE: By Evelyn Nieves

SECTION: Section B;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 726 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, N.J.


WHENEVER Emma Fantone gives one of her Newark tours be it the walking ones or
the formal kind on a chartered bus -- people always say the same things. "It's
'Oh, this is beautiful,' 'Ooh, how nice,' "Oh, I didn't know,' " she said. "You
know."

Surprising the public is half her fun, but it's almost too easy this time of
year. April is Newark's chance to brag. A five-minute drive from neighborhoods
that make commuters thank their lucky stars they live elsewhere, the cherry
blossoms are blooming in Branch Brook Park. Gawkers are out in droves, stopping
traffic to gape at the colors exploding from nearly 3,000 trees.

"Oh, this is nothing," said Ms. Fantone, dismissing a line of traffic that
followed the winding curves of the park. "On the weekend, it'll be solid with
cars. You'll be lucky to find parking."

Ms. Fantone is a member of the Friends of Branch Brook Park, so she feels a
happy buzz from the attention the park is finally getting. The friends of Branch
Brook have tried to let the world in on their secret for years. Every April,
they announce that the Cherry Blossom Festival in Branch Brook Park is bigger
than the one in Washington. Every chance they get, they mention that the park is
the oldest county park in the country, and that it was designed by Frederick Law
Olmsted's firm. These boasts have had quite a struggle catching on.

FOR decades, Branch Brook Park has been one of Newark's little-known wonders.
(The other is the Sacred Heart Cathedral, a monument to God and French gothic
design that makes some better known cathedrals look like office buildings.) But
this year, it has some momentum. To mark its 100th birthday, the friends of the
park are publishing a four-color map to show it off. The city is celebrating
Earth Day at the park and friends of that big park in Manhattan are coming to
visit at the end of the month.

"You can't help but love this," said Ms. Fantone, gazing at a stand of cherry
blossoms on a slope above a river. It was a busy spot, with families picnicking,
a group of senior citizens in jogging suits taking a brisk walk, kids riding
bikes.

Branch Brook Park is what people in Newark like to point out whenever the city
gets bad press. Which is to say, often. And the park really does deserve
fanfare. It's a postcard. Two rivers run through it and the houses surrounding
it are as elegant as those in the old, tony suburbs. "Want to see Newark's
oldest house?" Ms. Fantone said, pointing to a corner where a stone and wood
house stood protected by a fence. "That's 1710."

An egret or two has been known to visit the park and it has inspired at least
one writer. Louis Collazo, sitting cross-legged on a blanket in front of a pond,
composes poems in the park all year round.

"This is the most beautiful place I've ever seen," said Mr. Collazo. He is a
Vietnam veteran who has "seen a lot of places," so that says a lot.

"Seeing this park for the first time made me want to be a writer," he said,
looking up from a yellow pad he hid with his right hand. "I take the subway
here, and I enter a different world."

"I always recommend the subway," Ms. Fantone said. "It's a cheap, clean, safe
ride."

TO see all the cherry blossom trees, which are scattered, she insists on taking
people to the very end of the park. That means crossing the Newark border into
Belleville, which fronts some of the prettiest scenery. "And Belleville makes
sure you know it, too," Ms. Fantone said.

She lives in Montclair, and has never lived in Newark, but she's a Newark
cheerleader, no doubt about it. "I'm very positive about Newark," she said.
Officially, she's a volunteer for the Newark Museum. ("Twenty years now.")
Unofficially, she is one of the city's cultural experts. Her latest favorite
project was the Ballantine House, the mansion built by the beer baron that
adjoins the Newark Museum. Ms. Fantone's 80th birthday party last December
helped raise funds for the mansion's restoration, which was recently completed.

"I was the excuse for a fund-raiser, and I also give great directions," she
said. "It just turned out that way. I give very detailed directions, describing
landmarks."

She knows almost every tree in Branch Brook. "Look to the left," she said,
pointing out two deep-pink weeping cherry blossoms as poetic as trees get. "I
tell everybody these two trees are my trees."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              76 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Dole In Bosnia

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 25;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


Senator Robert Dole is talking about how the United States got into and fought
the war in Vietnam. He calls it incrementalism and is critical. He also talks
about Bosnia and what he intends to do about that.

As he speaks I remember another April day. I was walking down a street in
Saigon, from the telegraph office where I had filed a story to an outdoor cafe a
few blocks away. I used to have an early evening drink there with American
officers.

I heard a great thud. At the cafe I found out that a Vietnamese bicyclist had
ridden by and without pausing had tossed in a package. It went off some seconds
after he passed; perfect timing. On the terrace floor were the puddles of blood,
Vietnamese and American.

That was a full 40 years ago. It was six years before President Kennedy sent
16,000 Americans into Vietnam, supposed to train the South Vietnamese and keep
America from getting too involved.

On that day in 1955 I knew of course that there were already some American
officers advising Saigon, sent by President Eisenhower. But I never thought,
even as I stared at what was left of the cafe and knew I had been a few minutes
from being part of the debris, that we were really in the war.

The explosion at the cafe is a part of the story of the 58,000 dead Americans
and the escape helicopters on the American Embassy roof 20 years later -- links
in an incremental chain.

On "Meet the Press," where Mr. Dole was appearing, he said that come May he
would lead a move in the Senate to have the U.S. break the U.N. arms embargo and
arm the Bosnian Muslims to fight the Bosnian Serbs. He did not make the plain
connection between what he condemns in Vietnam and proposes in Bosnia.

The Bosnian Muslim army, already reinforced by Iran and other Muslim countries,
does not need handguns. It wants tanks and sophisticated artillery. At once or
eventually, that will involve U.S. military advisers to train Bosnian Muslims.

How many? Will America leave them prey for Serbian guerrillas and snipers? The
U.N. cannot protect them. France and Britain have already said they will not
maintain forces in Bosnia to become the targets of Serbian gunners if the U.S.
arms the Bosnians.

What power would Mr. Dole, Senator or President, commit to the protection of
U.S. forces? Will he promise never to send ground troops -- even if air power is
as useless against snipers and guerrillas in Bosnia as it was in Vietnam? Will
he commit U.S. forces to protect U.S. advisers all at once -- or incrementally?
Those are the easy questions.

Turn to page 39 of Robert McNamara's book "In Retrospect" for the questions that
the Kennedy Administration failed to ask of itself.

Would the fall of South Vietnam automatically mean the fall of Southeast Asia?
Would we be fighting a conventional or guerrilla war? Could we win by fighting
alongside the South Vietnamese?

That failure to ask and probe beforehand is not incrementalism. It is
dereliction of duty.

Mr. McNamara explains that they were all so terribly innocent, so confident, so
very busy those days. Neither Senator Dole nor President Dole would have any
such driveling excuses. That is why President Clinton has correctly refused to
lift the embargo.

Between now and May, Senator Dole really should face the Bosnian questions that
compare to the unconfronted Vietnam questions.

Would he not only arm the Bosnian Muslims but hit Serbian targets -- "lift and
strike" -- as many American journalists demand? Is there any chance that the
British, French, Germans and Russians are correct in their warnings that arming
the Bosnian Muslims would prolong the war and spread it deeper and wider?

If so, would Mr. Dole commit us to taking part in a wider war, say in Kosovo,
Albania or other Balkan garden spots? If a wider war involves Greece and Russia
winding up with the Serbs and Turkey with the Muslims, what action would we take
against the Russians and our allies? Which ally? Or would we just go home?

Mr. Dole is a serious and valuable man. He may be President. If he has answers
he should tell us now. If not, or if he is unsure, he should simply promise to
struggle for a negotiated settlement, even if he fails. God help us, what
America needs least is another memoir of dereliction.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              77 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Vietnam War's Costs, the Poor Bore More Than Their Share

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 118 words


To the Editor:

If Vietnam proved anything, it's the absurdity of Jude Wanniski's contention
(letter, April 14) that "in a representative democracy such as ours, the whole
of the nation shares equally in the costs history extracts from us." Vietnam
demonstrated that equally shared cost was no longer a feature of American
democracy.

I served in the Army in Vietnam from January 1968 to January 1969. The defining
characteristic of the vast majority of enlisted men was that they came from the
bottom of the socioeconomic order. Why? Because the draft was rigged against
them. Rights or wrongs of Vietnam aside, its costs were never equally shared.

MICHAEL R. KERLEY
Atlanta, April 14, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              78 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Good Listener Who Writes Plays On Social Justice

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words


Emily Mann specializes in "theater of testimony," a phrase she borrows from the
South African director Barney Simon. In her plays, real-life characters act as
witnesses to dramatic events in their own lives. In her new play, "Having Our
Say," Ms. Mann offers an essential example of her approach, as testimony is
delivered by those indomitable centenarian sisters, Sadie and Bessie Delany.

The recollections of the Delanys first appeared in the best-selling memoir of
the same title, which they wrote in collaboration with Amy Hill Hearth. In the
play, as in the 1991 book, the sisters (portrayed by Gloria Foster and Mary
Alice) look back on 100 years of their family life and of black history in
America. As children from a middle-class background the sisters may be atypical,
but their story is archetypal. Because they are black, or Negro as they refer to
themselves, they have had to face a lifetime of obstacles. Onstage, their story
is so personalized that it becomes inspirational.

Ms. Mann tried out the play at the McCarter Theater in Princeton, N.J., where
she is the artistic director. Then it quietly moved to the Booth Theater on
Broadway, where it opened recently to enthusiastic reviews. In an interview
shortly after the opening, Ms. Mann said that the idea for the play was
collaborative. With Camille Cosby and Judith Rutherford James as producers, she
had been working on a film about Winnie Mandela. Coincidentally, they all read
the Delany book at the same time, and decided to switch signals and make it
their next project.

Although the book was Ms. Mann's primary source, she firmly believes in doing
her own "field work," as she has with all her plays. Before she began writing
her adaptation, she met the sisters at their home in Mount Vernon, N.Y., and
decided to approximate that meeting on the stage. The play was designed as a
character study and conversation piece in which the Delanys welcome the audience
into their home and into their lives.

"If you take things that are difficult to hear and put them in a domestic
situation," Ms. Mann said, "then the audience is more open. You can talk about
the Holocaust when you're making chicken soup." Which is what she did in her
first play, "Annulla, an Autobiography." In "Having Our Say," the Delanys talk
about racism and segregation while preparing a festive dinner in honor of their
late father's birthday. "We all have had the experience of hearing about life
through older women, listening to an aunt or a mother or a grandmother," Ms.
Mann said. "I was convinced the power of their characters would cross the
footlights."

In one meeting with Ms. Mann, Sadie Delany hiked up her skirt and revealed her
scar from a recent hip operation. "Child," she advised, "the key is to love your
wounds." The playwright took that comment on a metaphorical as well as
psychological level. The notion of loving one's wounds eventually filtered
through the dialogue: Bessie's anger is tempered by Sadie's stoicism.

When people say to Ms. Mann that the play is the book onstage, she accepts it as
an "unwitting compliment," as an indication that she and her actresses have been
able to capture the spirit of the originals. At the same time, she wants to make
it clear that "when it looks effortless or inevitable," a transformation has
taken place.

Previously in her career, Ms. Mann has been confronted with the criticism that
she is more documentarian than playwright. But each of her plays has given
dramatic dimension to oral history. By breaking the barrier between the audience
and the characters, she has increased the intimacy of the storytelling. It is
the combination of political awareness and theatrical acumen that makes Ms.
Mann, at 43, such a provocative playwright.

She has been interested in social issues since childhood. Her father, Arthur
Mann, who died in 1993, was a highly regarded historian and a biographer of
Fiorello H. La Guardia. When Emily and her sister were growing up in
Northampton, Mass., family table talk often centered on questions of civil
rights and ethnic identity, and Mr. Mann always asked his children's opinions.
He also instilled in them, as Henry Beard Delany did in his daughters, the
feeling that if they persisted, they could be exceptional.

It was while her father was teaching at Smith College that she had her first
theatrical experience. At the age of 7, she went with a Sunday school group to a
Yiddish theater production of "The Dybbuk" in New York City, and was transfixed.
That was followed by "Fiorello!," which because of her father's interest in La
Guardia remains a musical close to her heart.

At Harvard University she studied play writing with William Alfred (Christopher
Durang was in her class). After graduation, she directed plays at institutional
theaters and often found that she was the first woman to do a play on a
company's main stage. At the same time, she continued her own writing, with
"Still Life," which offered testimony from wives of Vietnam veterans, and
"Execution of Justice," about the trial of Dan White, who killed Harvey Milk and
the Mayor of San Francisco. Each of her plays, she said, deals with "questions
of justice," but "Having Our Say" is "the sweetest child of them all." While the
other works have stressed negative aspects in society, "Having Our Say" is
resolutely uplifting.

In it, she and her designers have taken full advantage of the Delany family
album, using enlarged portraits of the sisters for scenic effect (the actresses
bear a strong resemblance to the Delanys, particularly in the case of Mary
Alice). Scenes from contemporary black history are also projected, including a
photograph of demonstrators marching from Selma to Montgomery, Ala. At the
forefront of the march is Arthur Mann: a daughter's tribute to her father.

Although members of the Delany family have seen the play, the sisters themselves
have not yet been to the theater. Ms. Mann said they plan to come, but because
of their ages (105 and 103), their visit will be a private one. "When you see
them," she said, "you forget how old they are. They laugh until tears roll down
their cheeks. They know what's going on; they don't censor themselves in any
way."

With the show open, Ms. Mann has returned to her duties at the McCarter.
Undaunted by a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis, she continues to lead an
extremely active life as playwright, director and artistic director. Last year,
as a certification of her success at Princeton, she received a Tony Award for
heading the outstanding regional theater in the United States.

Her choice of repertory remains a diverse mixture of new works and classics.
Next season she is planning to present a new play by Athol Fugard and her own
drama about the Greensboro, N.C., massacre in which demonstrators against the Ku
Klux Klan lost their lives.

"I'm always looking out to see what other people need to say," she said. "People
tell me stories. I'll sit down on a train alone, reading a book and minding my
own business and invariably someone will sit down next to me and start talking."
She listens.

Divorced from the actor Gerry Bamman, Ms. Mann lives in Princeton with their
son, Nicholas, who is 11. On opening night of "Having Our Say," the Dramatists
Guild sent her a postcard greeting with a picture of Lillian Hellman on the
front. Her son asked her who Ms. Hellman was. She replied, "She was an
extraordinary woman, one of the few who had plays on Broadway." With evident
pride, Nicholas said, "You and Lillian Hellman."

NAME: Emily Mann

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Emily Mann, playwright and director, at the McCarter Theater in
Princeton, N.J., her regular place of work. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              79 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Vietnam War's Costs, the Poor Bore More Than Their Share;
McNamara's Candor

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


To the Editor:

May I invite on a flight of fancy those, like The Times and James Fallows of
National Public Radio, who condemn Robert S. McNamara for his reflections on
Vietnam?

Imagine a country in which Kermit Roosevelt confessed the C.I.A. subversion of
Mohammed Mossadegh in Iran had been based on misconceptions, and would prove
disastrous; Allen Dulles wrote that the restoration of Carlos Castillo Armas to
the presidency of Guatemala had, by hindsight, removed an authentic nationalist
reformer, enmeshing us in military oppression; Henry Kissinger granted that he
was wrong in assuming that the salvation of Latin America required the
subversion of Salvador Allende, and a series of Presidents and secretaries of
state admitted their crusade against Fidel Castro served mainly to give him a
scapegoat for failures.

In all these cases diplomats allowed cold-war fixation to distort judgment. The
air would be a great deal fresher in a world where ex-diplomats told the painful
truth. America would enjoy the self-respect that attends honesty; working
diplomats would be more careful. Those of us who always viewed the Vietnam War
as Mr. McNamara sees it now should greet his book with a mood more akin to
compassion, gratitude -- yes, even hope -- than to ridicule.

GORDON L. SHULL
Wooster, Ohio, April 13, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              80 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Vietnam War's Costs, the Poor Bore More Than Their Share;
They Didn't Die in Vain

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


To the Editor:

Although it is said that Robert S. McNamara was always a hard man to like, you
were very hard on him, and inaccurate, when stating in "Mr. McNamara's War"
(editorial, April 12) that our soldiers in Vietnam died "platoon by platoon, for
no purpose."

I went to Vietnam with doubts about the war, but after two years in the rural
pacification program, I was convinced at least that the South Vietnamese did not
want to live under the rule of the Communists from the north, if only because
they knew the Communists would be more intrusive in their daily lives than the
inept government in Saigon. We were trying to do the right thing in saving a
people from a Communist regime that proved harsh, unrepresentative and unpopular
in the south.

And one must ask what happened with the indigenous leaders of the liberation
movement in the south. The antiwar movement told us "Madame Binh is gonna win."
Instead, she faded away along with the rest of the southern leadership as the
northerners asserted complete control.

In 1970, the Vietnamese district chief I worked with, an army major who had
fought all his adult life, told me he thought the war had long become too costly
for everybody.

But to say our soldiers died "for no purpose" vastly oversimplifies an effort
many truly thought was a just cause that could be brought to a reasonable
conclusion. It unnecessarily demonizes Mr. McNamara, and dishonors the dead. I
do not believe they died in vain.

ALFRED R. BARR
Washington, April 12, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              81 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Seoul Journal;
Defectors Find That the Welcome Mat Is Fraying

BYLINE: By SHERYL WuDUNN

SECTION: Section A;   Page 4;   Column 3;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 843 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea


During an escape from North Korea last year, Lee Ok Keum fainted on the frozen
Yalu River as soldiers patrolled just yards away. But her husband still managed
to bring her and their three children into South Korea to receive a hero's
welcome.

Their reception, a typical one for North Korean defectors, began when 100
reporters and officials greeted them at the airport in Seoul. They were then
escorted to a furnished apartment with a banquet waiting on the dinner table and
later given a bank account with $100,000.

"A lot of close friends I knew wanted to go to South Korea," said Ms. Lee's
husband, Yeo Man Chul, a 49-year-old former driver in the North Korean police
force. "Maybe they will come this year."

That prospect is precisely what worries the South Korean authorities. In this
land of modern skyscrapers, giant television screens and computer chips, a place
where church steeples and Buddhist temples stand side by side, the notion of
embracing artless, homespun, almost primitive brethren from the North is
unnerving.

What separates the South from the North is not just a strip of land bristling
with mines and military fortifications, or a difference in political systems,
but more and more a growing realization among Southerners that they do not want
to invite the Northerners into their homes.

Defectors from North Korea used to be so rare, one every couple of years or so,
that they were swept into society with great fanfare and showered with money and
presents.

Now that their numbers are growing -- there have been at least 10 so far this
year -- South Korea is becoming concerned that the trickle of defectors may
swell into a flood.

"In principle, we welcome all defectors from the North," said Koo Bon Tae,
assistant minister at the National Unification Board. "But diplomatically, there
could be very many complicated matters."

For defectors, it means that welcomes are more subdued and the amounts of cash
are smaller.

With North Korea facing severe economic difficulties, there is speculation that
its Government could collapse, but some analysts foresee instead a long, steady
loss of control by the Government. They say that as in Vietnam two decades ago,
masses of North Koreans may flee.

Some South Korean analysts estimate that at least 10,000 North Korean refugees
are hiding illegally in neighboring China. Some have also escaped to Russia.

South Korea used to go to great lengths to show off the rare North Korean
defector as a spoil of victory in the psychological war against the North. But
since the collapse of Communism elsewhere in the world, defectors have not been
as important to the South because it no longer sees a need to prove a point.

At the same time, South Koreans are also souring toward the idea of providing
money to North Koreans who defect, especially when they bring few useful skills
to society. Others assert that some North Koreans are not legitimate defectors.

"They are not dissidents who were defecting to South Korea, leaving behind
socialism for democracy," said Kim Sung Chull, a research fellow at the Research
Institute for National Unification. "The South Korean Government cannot
accommodate so many people."

Many in authority share this view and have reduced benefits to defectors. North
Koreans used to receive at least $20,000 plus a nice apartment, but now they get
a small room, and $20,000 is now a maximum.

Kim Myung Chul received $130,000, but that was because he was more valuable than
the average defector: he is a former bodyguard to Kim Il Sung, the North Korean
leader, who died in July.

When he arrived nearly two years ago, he could not do much with his North Korean
political science degree. Mr. Kim, 34, is now attending a university, working at
a bank, running his own trading company, owns two houses with his wife and
drives a good car.

Still, he shudders when asked about his mother and five siblings he left behind.

"Through my contacts in China, I could find out about my family, but I'm afraid
to do so," Mr. Kim said. "There is an 80 percent chance that they have fallen
into hardship."

That may be optimistic. One reason for the small number of defectors has been
the clear threat that remaining family members would be condemned to misery,
possibly including prison and execution.

Moreover, North Korean defectors have had a hard time integrating into South
Korean society. Resentment of them is growing, even though many people here
profess a yearning for reunification.

That is why Kim Nam Joon, who crossed the demilitarized zone six years ago, has
organized a support group for North Korean defectors, of whom there are nearly
600 here.

"They think that defectors get a lot of money and live in luxury and that all
they do is go around drinking and doing nothing," said Mr. Kim, a 33-year-old
assistant manager at the Kiya Motors Corporation.

"But that's wrong," he said. "I know what these North Koreans want. They are so
poor that the first thing they want is to eat so much that they can't eat any
more."


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yeo Man Chul, shown in a coffee shop in Seoul, was given a
hero's welcome when he escaped from North Korea with his wife and three children
last year. But the prospect of a big rise in the number of refugees from the
North is now raising concerns in the South. (Jeong Seong Jun for The New York
Times)

Map shows the location of Seoul, South Korea.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              82 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

METRO DIGEST

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 540 words



SCREENING TRIMS WELFARE APPLICANTS

Using a tough new screening process for welfare recipients, New York City has
sharply reduced the number of childless, able-bodied adults accepted for
benefits this year, Mayor Giuliani announced. A1.

NEW YORK CITY



LONGTIME INFORMER IS ACCUSED IN KILLING

For close to 40 years, Michael Burnett was a confidence man, stock swindler,
international thief and government informer. His cooperation with prosecutors in
New York led to the investigation of the city's Parking Violations Bureau. But
his dual career has ended; he was arraigned in Federal Court in Brooklyn and
charged with having masterminded the murder of a Staten Island woman in 1994.
B3.

CLOSING OF A GAY THEATER IS UPHELD

The city did not violate free-speech rights when it closed a gay movie theater
at which health officials said they had found high-risk sexual activity, a judge
has ruled. B3.

MAYOR SAYS BUS OWNERS SCUTTLED PACT

Mayor Giuliani said the private companies that bus the city's schoolchildren had
scuttled a tentative agreement between his office and the union representing
school bus drivers to avert a looming strike. B3.

GIULIANI SUES COUNCIL OVER POLICE PANEL

The impasse between Mayor Guiliani and the City Council over how to monitor
police corruption moved to the courts as aides to the Mayor filed suit against
the Council, saying its plan for an independent watchdog panel infringed on the
Mayor's powers. B2.

Steinway & Sons, the piano manufacturer that has been a New York institution
since 1853, was sold for $100 million to the Selmer Company, a maker of
instruments. Business Day, D5.

REGION

CIVICS CLASS WAS NEVER LIKE THIS

State leaders transformed the Capitol into a stage for guerrilla theater, played
with both flourish and venom for the cameras. Lieut. Gov. Betsy McCaughey
ambushed Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver by showing up unexpectedly at a news
conference that quickly devolved into a shouting match. And it escalated with a
verbal firefight between Mr. Silver and Governor Pataki in a budget session. B4.


IN ROCKLAND, A POLITICIAN UNDER FIRE

For two decades as District Attorney, Kenneth Gribetz has been such a towering
figure on Rockland County's political landscape that the Republican opposition
meekly endorsed him twice for re-election. But today his political career has
never been so imperiled. As for so many politicians, the catalyst for the
reversal has been a sexual scandal. News analysis, B6.

WITH RETURN OF REMAINS, A 'CLOSURE'

Frederick Burns arrived in Vietnam in December 1967 and within weeks was
reported missing while on his first patrol. His friends and family held out
hope, but several years later learned he had died in a prison camp in North
Vietnam. Next week, his remains are finally to be returned to Long Island. B6.

WIDOW OF PAN AM VICTIM GETS $19 MILLION

In one of the largest financial awards to an individual in the history of
commercial airline disasters, a Federal jury on Long Island has awarded $19
million to the widow of one of 270 people killed in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am
Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. B5.

About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3

Chronicle B5

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "PULSE: Tax Bite" shows the portion of an eight-hour work day
the average taxpayer must put in to earn enough to pay Federal, state and local
taxes. (Source: Tax Foundation)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              83 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

With Return Of Remains, A 'Closure'

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section B;   Page 6;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: MERRICK, L.I., April 18


When they were seniors in Calhoun High School here 28 years ago, Frederick
Burns, Joseph Carbone and Stephen Grilli were the best of friends. They made a
pact to join the Marines together and fight for their country in Vietnam.

"Fred and I joined the Marines and Steve went off to college," said Mr. Carbone,
now a 46-year-old detective in the Nassau County Police Department. "But we all
got together one last time late that summer." That night they took a $10 bill
and split it three ways. "For our next time together," Detective Carbone said.

It never happened. Frederick Burns -- a bright teen-ager who had been accepted
to Notre Dame and Villanova, arrived in Vietnam in December 1967 and within
weeks was reported missing while on his first patrol. His friends and family
held out hope, but several years later learned he had died in a prison camp in
North Vietnam.

Next week, his remains are finally to be returned to Long Island. It is both a
relief and a sadness for his middle-aged friends and the family. "It never
seemed to end for us," said Julia Burns, his mother. "I had accepted the fact
that he had died there, but I wanted his remains. I wanted to know for sure, and
I wanted to bury him next to his father here on American soil."

Two weeks ago, officers from the United States Marine Corps came to the Burns
home here and informed her that the remains of her son had been located and
removed from an abandoned and overgrown prison cemetery in Vietnam. She was told
that the remains were flown to Hawaii, where they were identified with the use
of dental and medical records, and that they would be returned to her on April
26.

News that his remains had been found spread quickly among his old friends in a
week when Vietnam has been much on the nation's mind again, raised by the former
Defense Secretary, Robert S. McNamara, who admits in a new book what much of the
rest of the nation has long felt: the war was a mistake.

"It's just too bad they didn't realize it back then," Mrs. Burns said.

Mr. Grilli, an insurance executive who played professional baseball in the
Detroit and Toronto organizations, has thought about it a lot. "Fred was a very
moral kind of guy, and believed in fighting for the honor of his country," he
said. "So it's kind of ironic that his remains are finally coming back home from
Vietnam just as Robert McNamara is saying it was all a big mistake."

Detective Carbone said: "I've still got my one-third of that $10 bill. I keep it
in a scrapbook with pictures of Fred and me at Camp Lejeune."

"We entered the Marines under a buddy system, stayed together through boot camp,
advanced infantry training and combat training in California," he said.

Detective Carbone recalled that he and Sergeant Burns, who was then a private
but whose rank was raised while he was a prisoner, arrived together in Vietnam
but were assigned to different companies and became separated.

"We later learned from prisoners who managed to survive that Fred had been
captured, became ill and died of an infection and malnutrition. But his remains
were never found, and his family never had closure," he said.

Mr. Grilli keeps his third of the $10 bill and a wallet-sized photograph of
Sergeant Burns dressed in his Marine uniform.

"Fred's father was my first real baseball coach and manager," said Mr. Grilli,
who went to college on a baseball scholarship. "We all started out in a police
boy's club league together. We lived at each other's houses, and everyone's Mom
was Mom to everyone."

Over the last year, 76 sets of remains of Americans have been returned with the
help of the Vietnamese. More than 2,000 soldiers are still unaccounted for,
according to the State Department.

Mrs. Burns said that a memorial service would be held for her son on April 29 at
the Sacred Heart Roman Catholic church in North Merrick. Burial will follow at
the National Cemetery at Pinelawn, L.I., next to his father, Frederick Sr., who
served in the United States Army in World War II and died in 1986.

"This brings peace to us all," said Mrs. Burns. "And my son won't be alone
anymore."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The remains of Sgt. Frederick Burns, missing since 1967, are
being returned to Long Island. Above, Joseph Carbone, with his third of a $10
bill he and Sergeant Burns divided with another friend, Stephen Grilli. Above
right, Mr. Burns and Mr. Carbone as marines; right, Mr. Grilli in college.
(Maxine Hicks for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              84 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Still Too Many Secrets

SECTION: Section A;   Page 22;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 467 words


When he campaigned for the Presidency in 1992, Bill Clinton made the noble
promise that he would reduce government secrecy. Three years and many
bureaucratic battles later, President Clinton has approved a compromise that
moves in the right direction, but not far enough.

Since the rise of the national security state during the cold war, Washington's
obsession with secrecy has kept the governed from learning what their Government
is doing, or even what it has done over the past years. From the secret
escalation of the Vietnam War three decades ago to the secret links between the
Central Intelligence Agency and Guatemala today, the Federal Government has
misused secrecy to shield misguided policies and activities.

The executive order signed Monday by Mr. Clinton would automatically declassify
existing secrets after 25 years, and require most future secret documents to be
declassified after 10 years. Until recently documents could be kept secret for
30 years or more and were declassified, if at all, only after time-consuming
review.

The order would also impede the creation of new secrets by encouraging official
challenges to overclassification. It would shift the burden of proof to
officials who want to keep a secret or category of secrets longer to provide
sound reasons in writing for doing so. Until now the classifying officials were
not always required to provide any reason for their action or even to identify
themselves.

Yet the new rules allow significant exemptions that officials can easily abuse
to claim secrecy for policies that ought to be subject to contemporaneous public
debate rather than historical analysis -- and regret -- decades later. The
Clinton order excludes nine categories of information from automatic 10-year
declassification. Some are warranted, like information on how to make nuclear
arms or the identity of American intelligence sources. Others are not, like
information that would "damage relations" with a foreign government. Nor does
the order compel classifiers to balance the public's need to know and the
state's interest in secrecy by subjecting such judgments to judicial review.

Reflexively classifying documents is only the most visible way of cutting off
the flow of public information essential to democratic governance. Mr. Clinton,
by trying to satisfy the military and intelligence agencies most prone to
abusing secrecy, has produced a policy that emphasizes declassifying secrets
rather than eliminating the Washington psychology that produces them in the
first place. Until a President is prepared to take on the whole culture of
secrecy, and the self-protective instincts that sustain it, the American people
and their elected representatives will not know what they need to know to
control their Government.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              85 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Seeks New Welfare Bill, Saying G.O.P. Plan Is Too Harsh

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 4;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1822 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


President Clinton tonight repeated his vow to oppose the welfare overhaul passed
by the House of Representatives as too harsh on children, and called on Congress
to pass by the Fourth of July a comprehensive bill that would put the poor to
work and provide greater flexibility for states.

In his first prime-time news conference in more than eight months, Mr. Clinton
also said he was ready 'to go to the mat" for his nomination of Dr. Henry W.
Foster Jr. as Surgeon General despite a warning by Senator Bob Dole of Kansas,
the majority leader, that he might not bring the nomination up for a vote.

In a brief opening statement, the President insisted that any welfare overhaul
be bipartisan and voted on separately, not enmeshed in an overall budget
reconciliation bill, which can be considered under special fast-track procedures
with limited amendments and debate.

Such a measure, which has been discussed by Republican leaders in Congress,
would be much more difficult for him to oppose or veto, since it would doubtless
contain many provisions he favored.

"We all know what we need," Mr. Clinton said of his requirements for a welfare
bill. "We need time limits for welfare recipients, we need strict work
requirements, we need very tough child support enforcement, we need more
flexibility for states."

The news conference, which lasted about 40 minutes, was only Mr. Clinton's
fourth formal evening news conference since he took office nearly 27 months ago.
The White House hoped to use the occasion of the spring Congressional recess to
let the President make his case directly to the public.

But his audience was limited because only one of the three commercial broadcast
networks, CBS, chose to carry it live, along with CNN and C-Span. That gave Mr.
Clinton the same access to the airwaves that Speaker Newt Gingrich, Republican
of Georgia, enjoyed 10 days ago, when he made a Presidential-style address
carried by those outlets.

On foreign policy, the President said he hoped he could persuade President Boris
N. Yeltsin of Russia not to sell nuclear reactors to Iran. He also said the
United States had limited ability to affect the dollar's strength in
international markets, but believed in a strong dollar.

And he said he had not meant to offend Japanese sensibilities when he responded
to a question at a newspaper editors meeting in Dallas 10 days ago by saying
that the United States should not apologize for having dropped two atomic bombs
on Japan in World War II.

But on topic after topic on the domestic front, Mr. Clinton studiously avoided
comments that could have produced headlines.

He sidestepped controversies like affirmative action, whether abortion should be
a political litmus test and his views on the merits of a flat income tax,
offering noncommittal comments on each. Asked to say why he should be
re-elected, he replied, "Because I have done what I have said I would do."

Only when he was asked whether he worried about being heard over the
Republicans' newly prominent chorus did Mr. Clinton seem to bristle a bit.

"The Constitution gives me relevance; the power of our ideas gives me relevance;
the record we have built up over the last two years and the things we're doing
to implement it give it relevance," he said. "The President is relevant here,
especially an activist President, and the fact that I'm willing to work with the
Republicans. The question is, Are they willing to work with me?"

Mr. Clinton declined to answer directly a reporter's question about what he
would say to white men who are angry about affirmative action, saying he wanted
to wait until his staff completed a detailed review of the question.

But he did note that the earnings of white men had been on the decline, and he
said this was due primarily not to affirmative action, but to things like
foreign competition and the tax and budget policies of the 12 years of
Republican rule in the White House before he took office.

The President also said: "We're all better off if everybody has an even chance.
But the Government should never give anything to someone who's unqualified over
someone who's qualified."

For weeks Mr. Clinton has criticized the House version of welfare overhaul as
too soft on work requirements and punitive to children in its insistence that
states deny benefits to teen-age mothers who have additional children. He has
threatened to veto the legislation if it is not modified by the Senate.

Tonight he said the House bill "saves a lot of money in the short run, but at
great damage to our long-run interests: promoting responsible parenting and
working to promote independence.

Mr. Clinton did not address the crucial issue of whether welfare benefits should
be guaranteed to everybody who meets income and other eligibility requirements
set by the Federal Government, as is the current practice, or whether Federal
money could be parceled out to states to disburse as they see fit, as many
Republicans want.

But in a continuing effort to show that his Administration has long favored
flexibility for states, Mr. Clinton also announced two new exemptions from
Federal rules to let Montana and Missouri experiment with welfare programs that
would place new restrictions on benefits, but not for children. The
Administration has now approved 30 such demonstration projects in 27 states.

As part of his appeal to the Senate, the President cited a welfare bill
co-sponsored last year by Senators Dole and Hank Brown of Colorado and other
Republicans that drew little notice or White House support at the time. That
bill had similarities to Mr. Clinton's own proposals for forcing people to find
jobs or risk losing benefits after two years, without some of the harsher
aspects of the bill that the House passed last month.

But the center of debate has shifted so markedly that Republicans are now poised
for more aggressive efforts, and Mr. Clinton's comments tonight amounted to
perhaps his strongest effort yet to recapture the initiative on an issue he
helped elevate to the forefront of national political debate as Governor of
Arkansas and as a Presidential candidate three years ago.

The President once again sought a middle ground, saying he did not seek to
produce a "pile of vetoes" but wanted to move beyond "politics as usual" and
find a way for to create a leaner, more cost effective Government. He noted that
he shared many goals with the Republicans, including a commitment to deficit
reduction and a line-item veto.

Although Mr. Clinton said he would fight to win confirmation for Dr. Foster he
answered a question about whether abortion would be a litmus test in
Presidential politics by saying only that that was up to the voters.

He called Dr. Foster a good man with a good record who should "not be caught up
in any kind of politics, Presidential or otherwise." That amounted to a mild
rebuke of Senator Dole, the Republican front-runner so far in the 1996
Presidential campaign.

Some Republicans have attacked Dr. Foster for having performed abortions in
private practice, and Mr. Dole has threatened to block a confirmation vote by
the full Senate even if the Labor and Human Resources Committee supports him.

Mr. Clinton said that he intended to press Russia's President, Mr. Yeltsin, not
to conclude a sale of nuclear technology to Iran. "I don't belive it is in their
interest to do so," Mr. Clinton said.

On former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara's new book on Vietnam, which the
President said last week had vindicated his own youthful opposition to the war,
Mr. Clinton said "I believe our policy was incorrect." But he added that the
book should not be used "as another opportunity to divide America," and he
flatly declined to discuss his handling of his own draft status during the
Vietnam War, which dogged his 1992 Presidential campaign. "I've said all I have
to say about it," Mr. Clinton asserted.

Speaking about trade negotiations with Japan, the President said that the United
States is not at risk of a trade war but that some difficulties in trade with
Japan remain to be resolved.

He accused Japan of being protectionist in some areas, but said that progress
had been made in many trade areas.

The President said it was up to Congress to decide whether Representative Robert
G. Torricelli, the New Jersey Democrat who earlier this year disclosed that a
paid agent of the Central Intelligence Agency had been involved in Guatemala in
the killing of one American and the husband of a Harvard-educated lawyer, had
violated any House rules when he made the disclosures. He said thought the
C.I.A.'s involvement would probably have become public even if the Congressman
had not disclosed them.

While the President said that in theory he was not opposed to a new tax system
with a single flat rate, he quickly added that the studies on the current flat
tax proposals showed that they are unfair.

"The studies show that they will raise taxes for people who earn less than
$200,000, and lower them for people who earn more than $200,000," like himself
and his wife, Mr. Clinton said. "The studies are not promising on the proposals
out there now."

The President defended the decision that was made to withdraw an exhibit at a
Smithsonian museum on the Enola Gay, the bomber that carried the first nuclear
bomb dropped on Japan. The exhibit was scrapped after veterans' groups charged
that it was biased against the American decision to use the bomb.

Mr. Clinton said he supported the cancellation, saying the exhibit had
questioned the morality of the use of nuclear weapons against Japan in World War
II and was an inappropriate expression of the 50th anniversary of the end of the
war.

"I do not believe on the celebration of the end of the war and the service and
sacrifice of the American people that it is an appropriate time to be launching
a major inquiry into that," he said.

Mr. Clinton was asked about his statement 10 days ago, in response to a question
at the newspaper editors' convention that, based on information available to him
in 1945, President Harry S. Truman was right to use atomic bombs and that the
United States should not now apologize. The remark was considered offensive in
Japan, but the President said he meant no harm.

"I did not say that to hurt anyone's feelings or to be insensitive to anyone in
Japan," he said. "I know what a terrible, terrible loss of life there was, how
many scarred families there were, how difficult it was.

"It was hard in World War II," he continued. "Twenty million Russians lost their
lives in World War II. No one can fail to be sensitive to the loss. Do I wish
none of it had happened? Of course I do.

"But that does not mean that President Truman, in the moment of decision, made
the wrong decision or that the United States can now apologize for a decision
that we did not believe then and I do not believe now was the wrong one."


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH  ; RUSSIA; IRAN;

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I think when people cease to put the interests of their
children and the future ahead of their interest of themselves in the short run,
we get in trouble," President Clinton said last night at his news conference.
(David Scull/The New York Times) (pg. B9)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              86 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From the News Conference With President Clinton

SECTION: Section B;   Page 8;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 4680 words


Following are President Clinton's opening statement at his prime-time news
conference last night in Washington and excerpts from the question-and-answer
session that followed, as transcribed by The New York Times:

PRESIDENT CLINTON Good evening.

Ladies and Gentlemen, before we begin the press conference I want to express on
behalf of Hillary and myself our profoundest condolences to the families and to
the loved ones of the eight Americans who were killed in the crash of the Air
Force plane in Alabama last night.

Tonight, I want to talk about welfare reform, but before I do, I'd like to take
just a minute to put welfare reform into the context of what is going on now in
the United States Congress.

Before the Easter break, the House of Representatives produced a flurry of ideas
and proposals. Some of them were good, some need work, some should be rejected.

My job is to work with people of good faith in both parties and both Houses to
do what is best for America. I was not elected to produce a pile of vetoes. And
the Congress was not elected to produce a pile of political issues for the next
election.

My philosophy is that we have to go beyond this kind of politics as usual, the
old debate about whether there should be more government or less government. I
think we need a better and different government that helps people who are
helping themselves. One that offers opportunity but demands responsibility.

I have some common goals with the new Republican majority in the Congress. They
say they want to reduce the deficit and the size of government. I support that.

My Administration has reduced the deficit by $600 billion and is reducing the
size of Government by over 250,000 people. In fact, if it were not for the
interest we have to pay on the debt run up between 1981 and 1992, our
Government's budget would be in balance today.

Let me say that again because I don't think the American people know that: If it
were not for the interest we have to pay this year on the debt run up between
1981 and 1992, our Government's budget would be in balance today.

The Republicans say that they want to be tough on crime. Our crime bill is tough
on crime, and I want to work with them to build on that. The Republicans are
supporting the line-item veto, and so am I. I worked hard to get a version of
the line-item veto passed to the Senate, and I look forward to working with them
to actually getting agreement in both houses and having a line-item veto come
into law.

As we look ahead, the issue is, What are we going to do on the outstanding
matters?

I have commented at length on them before the newspaper editors, but let me say
again: I want us to show responsibility and common sense and decency.

Do we need to cut regulation, as they say? Of course, we do. But we don't need
to undermine our commitment to the safety of our skies or the purity of our
water and air or the sanctity of our long-term commitment to the environment.

Do we need to be tough on crime? Of course, we do, but we don't need to repeal
the commitment to 100,000 police officers or the assault-weapons ban.

Do we need to cut taxes? I believe we do, but not as much as the House bill
provides. I think the tax cuts should be targeted to the middle class and to
education, so we raise incomes and growth for America over the long run.

Now, let's talk a little about welfare. That's an issue that the Republicans and
I and the Congress of Congressional Democrats should be able to agree on. They
say we should end welfare as we know it. That's a commitment I made in 1992, and
again in 1993 and 1994. Welfare reform is surely an example where all the people
ought to be able to get together in the Congress to have reform.

We all know what we need. We need time limits for welfare recipients. We need
strict work requirements. We need very tough child-support enforcement. We need
more flexibility for the states. That's what our Administration has been working
on for more than two years now.

We already have freed 25 states from cumbersome Federal rules and regulations so
they can pursue welfare reform on their own. Tonight, we're cutting red tape for
two more states, for Montana and Missouri. One state with a Republican Governor,
one state with a Democratic Governor. Both committed---- That require people on
welfare to go to work within two years.

That's the same time limit I called for when I ran for President and that I
called for last year.

Most people are in agreement on this. The question is, What are we going to do
about it in Washington?

In 1994, I introduced the most sweeping welfare reform ever presented to
Congress. In 1994, Senator Dole, Senator Gramm, Senator Brown and Senator
Packwood co-sponsored a pretty good bill. In 1994, Speaker, then Congressman,
Gingrich and 162 of the 175 House Republicans sponsored a bill that was an awful
lot like mine.

All of these bills were based on the same idea: the fundamental goal of welfare
reform is to move people into the work force and to make them independent.

But the bill that passed the House of Representatives, supported by the House
Republicans, in my opinion is too weak on work and too tough on children. It
saves a lot of money in the short run but at great damage to our long-run
interests: promoting responsible parenting and working to promote independence.

The only way to save money over the long run is to move people from welfare to
work and to insure that they have the skills to keep jobs and to stay
independent.

And it's wrong to cut children off just because their mothers are minors. After
all, a child is a child, a baby is a baby. Whether they're white or black or
brown, whether they're born in or out of wedlock, every child deserves a chance
to make a good life.

Surely, we should not punish children for the mistakes of their parents.
Instead, we ought to give them a chance to become independent, full
participating citizens, not part of the welfare population.

Let me say again this does not have to be a partisan issue. I know that there
are some here in Washington, for example, who want to fold this whole welfare
reform issue into the broader budget debate. If you put it into the budget
process as those of you live here know, it can be buried in a pile of other
issues and then there will be no need for a bipartisan consensus on welfare
reform.

But welfare reform is too important for that kind of Washington game. It should
be open, it should be bipartisan and we should get on with it right away. I want
to challenge Congress to pass a bipartisan welfare reform bill and put it on my
desk by July 4 so that we can celebrate Independence Day by giving Americans on
welfare the chance, the opportunity, the responsibility to move to independence.


Questions and Answers

Q. Senator Dole has threatened to block Dr. Foster's nomination as Surgeon
General from reaching a vote or going to the Senate floor. I have a two-part
question. Are you going to the mat to fight for it? Going to withdraw it? And do
you think that abortion, which is still lawful in this country, will be a litmus
test in Presidential politics?

A.  Yes, I'm going to the mat for the nomination.

Whether abortion is a litmus test in Presidential politics is up to the voters.

Dr. Foster is a good man with a good record as a family doctor, as someone who
has helped thousands of mothers to give birth to their children and as an
academic. And as someone who supported policies that are pro-family and
pro-child. He is qualified; he should be confirmed; he should not be caught up
in any kind of politics, Presidential or otherwise.

Q.  Mr. President, the two countries with which the United States has important
relationships, Russia and China, want to sell nuclear technology to Iran over
your objections. Can you explain why Russia, in particular, would want to give
this technology to a neighboring country that intelligence agents say is
determined to acquire nuclear weapons? And do you think that when you go to
Moscow that you'll be able to persuade Mr. Yeltsin to cancel the sale?

A.  Well, as you know, I cannot explain why Russia would do it, since I don't
believe that it's in their interests to do it. I don't think it's right, and I
don't think it's in their interests.

If you ask them, I think they would say that they had a prior contractual
obligation to do it and they believed that the level of nuclear technology in
the power plants is so low that it won't lead to the development of a nuclear
weapon. I believe that's what they would say.

I think that's what the Chinese would say.

But I disagree with them, and we're continuing to work with them. . . .

Q.  Mr. President, you've been quoted as saying that you believe that Robert
MacNamara's new book, in which he essentially says that the U.S. had no
underlying basis for the war in Vietnam vindicates your own opposition to the
war.

I wonder if we could hear you talk about that, and also if in this time of
reflection you feel vindicated about your handling of your own draft status.

A.  On the second matter, I've said all I have to say about it, and on the
first, I believed our policy was incorrect.

I think the book supports that conclusion, but I do not believe that the book
should be used as yet another opportunity to divide the United States over that.
We should learn from what happened, resolve not to repeat our mistakes, honor
the service of Americans and go forward together.

That's what we should be doing.

Q.  The Japanese are threatening to pull out of auto talks unless U.S.
negotiators stop threatening sanctions. Are you willing to do that? Are we at
risk of a trade war?

A.  Well, we should not be at risk of a trade war, but I would remind you that
we have been very patient as a country for a very long time in this area. And
our major trade deficit in the world, except for our oil imports, has been with
Japan, and, of course, now with China and other countries in Asia combined.

But Japan is a country that is a wealthy country, almost as wealthy as we are
when you compare purchasing power parity -- where consumer prices within the
country of Japan are much, much higher than they are in the United States and
could be maintained at that high level only by a sophisticated system of direct
and indirect protectionism which is most manifest in this area.

We have strong differences. We have worked hard to resolve our trade differences
with Japan. We have made some significant progress in other areas, and I'm going
to let Ambassador Kantor continue to pursue this one in the way that we have
agreed upon.

I think that he is proceeding in good faith.  Q.  I'd like to ask you a
philosophical question tonight. A number of the nation's social critics have
been saying lately that America is what they call a morally bewildered society.
And they cite as evidence the fact that much of the nation's political discourse
and its public debate centers on the subject of family values. These critics say
that family values is really a fig leaf or a euphemism to cover up the nation's
moral relativism.

I'd like to know if you think that the distinction between moral virtue in the
ancient Roman or old Victorian sense, the distinction between that and family
values is a valid and legitimate one?

And if you do, do you think that you and the other candidates in the '96
Presidential contest should debate the nation's social compact on the basis of
instilling moral virtue rather than family values?

A.  Well, I think family values require moral virtue. I mean that family values
mean to me that people make common sacrifices to stay together, to work
together, to put primacy on the family unit and the rearing of children and put
the children first.

I think that that has been at the bedrock of our success as a country and as the
bedrock of other successful civilizations, and I think when people cease to put
the interests of their children and the future ahead of their interest of
themselves in the short run, we get in trouble.

I believe that if you look at the successes in this country, both the individual
successes and the places where they're a broad success, there are strong support
for families, and families were generally successful.

I also believe that America worries so much about moral relativism because we
are the least relativistic of all the big countries. We are the most religious;
we are the most likely to believe not only in God but in absolute rules of right
and wrong here on earth.

And I think the fact that we worry about it shows that we have problems in our
country which are inconsistent with our beliefs. And we know that we can't solve
our problems purely by some common social action; we also require personal
changes to solve those problems.

I think that is a broadly held belief in the United States, and I certainly
believe that my experience is consistent with that.

Q.  Mr. President, in California recently you urged Democrats who were grappling
with the issue of affirmative action to be sensitive to the feelings of angry
white males.

And if you were addressing a group of so-called angry white males tonight, how
would you convince them that Federal programs that have the goals of giving a
certain percentage of contracts or jobs to minorities are good and fair for
everyone including white males?

A.  Well, first of all, I don't want to prejudge the review of all the Federal
programs that I'm going through, so I wouldn't---- I don't want to answer that
question.

But I would say first of all to them, I will answer the question when I complete
the review, which won't be long.

But I don't want to---- I would say though the earnings of male workers
including white male workers have been declining when measured against inflation
for years now. So, people are working harder, these male workers are working
harder for lower wages, unless they have good education or are in a section of
the economy that's growing very rapidly.

I would say to them, Your problem is the problem of what's happening to wages
and rising inequality in the United States. And it was caused primarily by
foreign competition, technology, the weakening of organized labor, the collapse
of the minimum wage and, according to the study which was in the paper today,
the tax and budgetary policies of the last 12 years before I became President,
which aggravated inequality.

And what I'm trying to do is, No. 1, give you equality again. With better jobs,
more jobs, a higher minimum wage, a tax cut for workers with modest incomes and
children in the home. About $1,000 a year for incomes under $25,000 this year.

And that on affirmative action, your principles should be, We're all better off
if everybody's got an even chance, if there's no discrimination, if people have
the opportunity to live up to the fullest of their ability. But the Government
should never give someone who's unqualified anything over someone who's
qualified.

Q.  Congressman Torricelli of New Jersey is embroiled in a controversy over the
revelations he made about the C.I.A. and its apparent involvement in murders in
Guatemala. You've indicated your concerns about the C.I.A.'s conduct. I want to
know what your thoughts are about Congressman Torricelli's conduct. Should he
have revealed that information or not? And if he should not have, should he be
disciplined?

A.  Well, what should happen to him depends on, No. 1, what the facts are, and,
No. 2, what the House decides to do with it. And they have to do their
investigation, and they have to make their determination.

What I do believe is that the United States owes the American people a thorough
investigation of the allegations of what went on. And it may take a little time
because these are things which occurred, by and large, before I became
President. But I've asked the Intelligence Oversight Board to look into it, I
expect them to do a thorough and deep job, and I expect to have the truth, and I
expect us to take the appropriate action.

That is exactly what we will do, but it is not for me to judge Congressman
Torricelli. . . .

Q.  Mr. President, outward appearances would indicate that one of your key
foreign policy goals, a comprehensive Middle East peace, is deadlocked,
especially on the Israeli-Syrian track. Is there a stalemate, and especially in
light of the recent terrorist incidents and word today that Syria wants to get
land to the Sea of Galilee?

A.  Well, I won't comment on the details of the negotiations between them
because that would only complicate matters.

It is difficult. We knew it would be difficult.

I do believe that both Prime Minister Rabin and President Assad want to make a
comprehensive peace. I do believe that both of them understand they don't have
unlimited time. I do believe that the United States still has the trust of both
parties in working to help them reach an agreement, and I, as concerned as I am
about it, I am more hopeful today than I was, let's say, 45 days ago. We just
have to keep at it. . . .

Q.  Sir, there's something funny going on at the C.I.A. I wonder just how many
times you have looked into it and had a really good honest briefing on it. But
today, we have found out that they are taking the classified documents and
sending them by mail to retired or former C.I.A. people. And this gets them out
of the records, out of the storehouse out there, and gets them into a private
home where nobody could ever find them if they conducted a Congressional
investigation of C.I.A. reports. Some of these are classified and some are not,
but they have the names on them of the officers who worked on them and they have
mailed them back to the officers who worked on them.

Why they're doing this I don't know, but it sounds like they're trying to keep
us from getting a chance at the records.

A.  Let me make two comments quickly on that. First of all, I had made it clear
to the Intelligence Oversight Board that I want a thorough investigation of all
these matters and clear to the C.I.A. leadership there, including the Acting
Director, that I want the records, the relevant records, secured and accounted
for.

Secondly, I think this reinforces the need for the United States Senate to hold
quick confirmation hearings and have a prompt vote on John Deutch to be the new
Director.

Let's get him out there so we can get on with the business of doing what we need
to do.

Q.  Sir, I know you've said that you'd like to put politics aside for a certain
period, but last week you opened, you formally opened, your campaign office for
re-election in town here, and I was wondering if you might take a minute to say,
to fill in the blank, and say, I believe I should be re-elected President in
1996 because---- You take it from there.

A.  I believe I should be re-elected because I have done what I said I would do,
because we have got good results and because the policies that I now advocate,
most importantly, will address the outstanding problems of the country.

If you look at this problem of inequality, if you look at the economic problems,
what is the response? The response is to invest more in education, to raise the
minimum wage, to expand trade in high-wage products in the United States to
generate more jobs.

If you look at the problems of the social fabric that you asked about, what is
the answer? The answer is to tell people the truth about things they have to do
to make things better, to assume more responsibility to do the right things, but
to have policies from welfare reform to supporting children, to doing things to
make adoptions easier and more preferable to other alternatives -- such as we're
working on now -- that build up families and build up communities.

We are moving the country in the right direction. We are doing what we said we
would do, we are getting results. This country is in a stronger position today
than it was two years ago.

Q.  Mr. President, the idea of a flat tax is more and more popular with a lot of
people. In your mind, what would be wrong with a flat tax? And more
fundamentally, for the lack of a more elegant term, what's wrong with blowing up
the present tax structure as it is?

A.  Well, I'll tell you what. After I just went over my tax returns last week,
that has more appeal than it did a week ago. And I think that a lot of Americans
feel that way.

On the flat tax, what we have to do is to put a pencil to a piece of paper and
see how it works. All the studies I have seen say that all the proposals out
there now will raise taxes for people with incomes under $200,000 and lower
taxes for people within incomes over $200,000, like my wife and myself, which
would be unfair. And that if they don't do that, they explode the deficit.

So, the question is, We can't explode the deficit, and we can't be unfair. Can
we simplify the tax system without being unfair or increasing the deficit?

And if we can do it, then I am open to it.

But the studies are not promising on the proposals that are out there now.

Q.  Mr. President, both you and your Treasury Secretary have said repeatedly
that a strong dollar is in America's interest. But some people don't believe you
because they don't see you taking any specific steps to try to make that happen.

Can you tell the American people why this would be in America's interest,
particularly since a weak dollar encourages export sales and since the inflation
it might cause seems no where on the horizon?

And if you do want a strong dollar, what can you do or what are you willing to
do to achieve it?

A.  In the present climate, the ability of governments to affect the strength of
their currencies -- or in the case of Japan, as you see, would like a weaker
yen, the ability of governments that have strong currencies to get a weaker one
in the short run -- may be limited as we have seen in countless examples over
the last several years.

So what you have to do is work over the long run.

The United States does want a strong dollar. We believe in the importance of
fundamentals in our economy. We believe in getting the deficit down, getting
jobs up and pursuing a responsible course.

I have done that for two years. I will continue to do that.

Q.  A follow-up: what a strong dollar would do for the economy?

A.  The point is that a weak dollar eventually, over a long period of time, will
weaken the economy, either by bringing inflation into it or by upsetting the
whole complex international fabric of business relationships that are carried on
in dollars.

So, we do have an interest over the long run in strong currency. But we have to
look at it, for Government actions need to be directed toward long-term
fundamentals, sound economic policies, sound growth policies, sound investment
policies.

Q.  In terms of your upcoming trip to Russia, in spite of what your
Administration has said numerous times to Russia about NATO expansion, the
Yeltsin Government either does not understand or will not understand that this
is not a threat to them, and in fact some people in Russia are now talking about
rearming in a nuclear fashion to allay some, any, type of attacks from the West.
When you meet with Boris Yeltsin, what will you say to him to convince him that
it is not a threat?

A.  I will say what I have always said:

That NATO is not an offensive alliance, it is a defensive alliance, a security
alliance,

That NATO has worked with Russia in Bosnia,

That NATO has invited Russia to be a part of the partnership for peace and has
not excluded anybody from potential NATO membership,

That Russia in terms of its security interest has nothing to fear from a NATO
which expands in a gradual open, straightforward way and at the same time is
deepening its relationship with Russia.

Q. Yeltsin did not understand that?

A.  That's something you'll have to ask them.

I understand they, you know, they have the same sort of domestic political
pressures that every country has, and misunderstandings. But I think the United
States has shown its good faith in our dealings with Russia. The United States
did not move aggressively to help Russia overcome the burden of decades of
Communist economics and other problems that were left when the cold war was over
and the Soviet Union collapsed. To turn around and make Russia an enemy, that's
not why we did all that work to help rebuild their economy, to support their
movement to democracy, to support their integration and their work with the G-7
and all these other countries.

We have shown our good faith, but we cannot, and we should not, give any nation
a veto over the expansion of NATO when it is otherwise appropriate to do so.

Q.  Mr. President, concerning follow-up on the question about the dollar, there
is growing concern that there is instability within the international financial
system as a whole. There are some proposals like, you know, the Japanese Finance
Minister put out a proposal regarding international financial reform, reform of
the international system. How do you view this situation, and what would be your
primary concerns in such a reform of the international financial system?

A.  First, let me say that this is an issue which needs to be addressed. But it
needs to be addressed in a very thoughtful way so as not to further aggravate
whatever conditions exist there.

It is obvious that the integration of the global financial markets has many
advantages, that you can get money to places in a hurry, that places that have
been underdeveloped can develop more quickly, that you can develop sophisticated
trading relationships more rapidly. And that this is all a positive.

It is also obvious that, as with almost every other element in the modern
society that we live in, every force of integration carries within it the seeds
of potential disintegration, a rapid unraveling.

So last year, that's why I asked the heads of the other G-7 countries, the other
major economies, to devote a discussion this summer when we meet in Canada to
this subject. We have been working on it; the Japanese have been working on it;
the Canadians have been working on it; the Europeans have been working on it.
And we will have a long talk about it this summer. We will do our very best to
come up with sensible statements about where we go from here.

Q.  Mr. President, follow-up on the answer you gave a moment ago. When you spoke
last week about President Truman's decision to drop the atomic bomb, Americans
overwhelmingly thought you were right not to apologize. The Japanese
overwhelmingly thought you were insensitive. Were you surprised that 50 years
after the event there is still that wide divergence? Do you see any chance of
that gulf ever being bridged?

A.  The way to bridge the gulf is to talk about the friendship that we have now,
the respect and regard we have now, the common interest that we have now.

I did not say that to hurt anyone's feelings or to be insensitive to anyone in
Japan. I know what a terrible, terrible loss of life there was, how many scarred
families there were, how difficult it was.

It was hard in World War II. Twenty million Russians lost their lives in World
War II. No one can fail to be sensitive to the loss.

Do I wish none of it had happened? Of course I do.

But that does not mean that President Truman in the moment of decision made the
wrong decision. Or that the United States can now apologize for a decision that
we did not believe then, and I do not believe now, was the wrong one.

That has nothing to do with my feelings for the Japanese people, my profound
sorrow at the suffering and the agony they have, that they went through. But we
have recovered from that; we have gone on from that; we have one of the world's
most important bilateral relationships.

The thing we need to do now is to join together and look to the future. We're up
to our ears in challenges today. Let's get on with dealing with them in mutual
respect and support, and that's the way to get this behind us.

Thank you very much.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              87 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Veteran Suggests McNamara Donate Profits

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B;   Page 9;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 493 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


The head of the American Legion said today that former Defense Secretary Robert
S. McNamara ought to donate to Vietnam veterans the royalties from his book in
which he confesses to mistakes in assessing the war.

"If Secretary McNamara is sincere about atoning for sending Americans into a war
he knew they couldn't win, then he shouldn't profit financially from this sad,
tragic, late confession," William M. Detweiler, the leader of the
3.1-million-member organization, said in a statement issued by his headquarters.

"The consequences of Secretary McNamara's failed judgment can be seen hobbling
down the corridors of our nation's V.A. hospitals," Mr. Detweiler said. "The
Vietnam legacy lives today in homes still grappling with the consequences of
Agent Orange and veterans still struggling with the demons of
post-traumatic-stress disorder."

Mr. McNamara was not immediately available for comment. His recent book, "In
Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," has raised fresh disputes 20
years after the end of the war, in which three million Vietnamese and 58,000
Americans were killed.

Some of his critics say that if, as he now declares, he became convinced in the
late 1960's that the United States could not gain a military victory, he had a
moral obligation to say so publicly at the time.

Others say that at the very least, he should have spoken up during the four
years that American participation in the war continued after he left office.

His answer: Had he spoken up, he would have aided the enemy in Hanoi.

"What should I have said?" he asked Monday with a touch of exasperation during
an appearance on "The MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour" on PBS. "What should I have said
that would not have brought aid and comfort to the enemy? I was the Secretary of
Defense!"

Why did he not resign in protest of President Lyndon B. Johnson's Vietnam
policy? Because, he said, he does not believe in "principled resignations."

"I was a servant of our President," Mr. McNamara said. "He appointed me. He was
elected by the people. My obligation to our people was to do what their elected
representative wanted."

Appearing on the same program but in a different segment, Senator John McCain,
Republican of Arizona, was disdainful of Mr. McNamara's book.

"It's 25 years too late," said the Senator, who as a captured Navy pilot spent
seven years as a prisoner of war in Vietnam. "And frankly, we don't need it."

Mr. McCain's view is that the way the war was pursued prevented an American
victory.

If Mr. McNamara felt as he now says he did, "he should have resigned at the
time," Mr. McCain said.

Another guest on the program, former Senator George McGovern, who campaigned
against the war as the 1972 Democratic Presidential nominee, disputed Mr.
McNamara's view that principled resignations are not within American political
custom.  Many officials have resigned when they could not abide their
Presidents' policies, he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              88 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOK NOTES;
Nobody Can Keep Pace With John Grisham

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


Highbrow critics may shudder, but John Grisham has once again set the publishing
world afire, selling about 300,000 copies of "The Rainmaker" in its first week
in bookstores (the initial printing was a record 2.8 million copies). And on May
3, the book will step neatly into the No. 1 spot on the New York Times
best-seller list. No one need ask who the real rainmaker is.

Even by today's publishing standards, with blockbusters all but required to keep
publishers afloat, this book is off to a phenomenal start.

"It's the fastest-selling hardcover book ever, as far as we know," said Ellen
Archer, a spokeswoman at Doubleday, Mr. Grisham's publisher.

Spurred in part by Mr. Grisham's publishing-day television appearances on
"Today" and "Entertainment Tonight," a flattering review in USA Today and a
large ad in The Times, the book found an immediate audience. Chain stores sold
tens of thousands of copies in a matter of days. Even many independent
booksellers, whose sales of best sellers are more modest, saw 40 to 50 copies
walk out the door.

"It was far and away our No. 1 book last week," said Lisa Herling, a spokeswoman
for Barnes & Noble. "It did six times better than our No. 2 book. That's what we
expected. But our booksellers and buyers say it is his best one yet."

Mr. Grisham's primary appeal, the booksellers say, is that his plots, while
suspenseful, are so easy to follow that a reader can return to the plot even
after a substantial break and quickly find the place.

Mr. Grisham's previous novel, "The Chamber," continues on the fast track as well
and is still No. 1 on the Times paperback fiction best-seller list. More than
four million copies of the book, published by Dell, are now in print. That makes
for a grand total of more than 55 million copies of Grisham books floating
around out there.

Berendt's 'Garden'

The charted list life of a standard best seller usually resembles an inverted V:
low start, peak, then a drop.

"Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil" by John Berendt, however, is enjoying
what looks more like a perpetual W.

Since it first appeared as No. 9 on the New York Times nonfiction best-seller
list in March 1994, "Midnight," an account of a murder in Savannah, Ga., and the
colorful characters who enter the picture, has sprinted to No. 5, dropped to No.
13, and in recent weeks bolted back to reclaim the No. 5 spot. On May 3, it will
dip to No. 7.

Resurrections a year after publication are rare, even for the best novels. Yet
"Midnight" has enjoyed not one but a series of magical moments in which
publicity, bookseller support and reader enthusiasm converge to push it back up.

On average, more than five articles about the book and its characters appear in
the press each week. Spots on the book still appear on national radio and
television shows. Owners and clerks at both chains and independent stores
continue to "handsell," or recommend it to customers. And tourists spurred by
oodles of travel articles on Savannah using "Midnight" as a reference point, are
taking "Walk the Book" tours and eating salads "from the Garden of Good and
Evil."

All of which has amounted to sales of more than 500,000 copies nationwide.

Mr. Berendt, a 55-year-old Esquire columnist who watches his book's moves on
best-seller lists the way sports fans read box scores, said "Midnight" has had
two surprise leaps. One came in February, when after Mr. Berendt's appearance on
"Good Morning America," the book jumped from No. 11 to No. 7. Then earlier this
month, after a full-page story ran in Time magazine, the book, which had dropped
to No. 8, jumped to No. 5.

What next ? Mr. Berendt said he had recently taped a spot for "Oprah" that
should appear in late spring or early summer. For authors, a moment on "Oprah"
is better than a month on a Times Square billboard.

Mr. Berendt reflected on his success: "It tells you something about how books
are sold, doesn't it?"

America's Vietnam

In Shakespeare's "Richard II," the Bishop of Carlisle warns a rebellious
Bollingbroke, "Tumultuous wars/Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound."

Though 20 years have passed since the fall of Saigon, the tumult the Vietnam War
caused still confounds both Vietnamese and American authors, as seen in the rush
of spring books dealing with the war and its aftermath.

In addition to "In Retrospect," by Robert MacNamara, which will be The Times's
No. 1 nonfiction title on May 3, three other books are attempting to assess the
war's impact. "A Lovely Country" (Harcourt Brace), a first novel by David
Lawton, a Vietnam veteran, deals with the final years of the American presence
in Vietnam, with double agents and corrupt generals, seedy brothels and jaded
diplomats.

From Vietnam's side comes "A Novel Without a Name" (William Morrow) by Duong Thu
Huong, an effort to assess the war's psychological impact on the Vietnamese. And
"The Sorrow of War," (Pantheon) by Bao Ninh, is being called the Vietnamese
version of "All Quiet on the Western Front."

End Notes

*"Diderot," a critical biography by P.N. Furbank, a British scholar, is the
winner of the first Truman Capote Award for Literary Criticism. The $50,000
award is given for general literary criticism published in English over the
previous four years. "Diderot," a portrait of the 18th-century French
philosopher and dramatist, was selected by a six-member panel of critics, among
them Henry Louis Gates, Elizabeth Hardwick and Geoffrey Hartman. The judges
confirming the award included the writers Frank Conroy, Jorie Graham and William
Gass.

*"The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln," by Phillip Shaw Paludan, which examines
Lincoln's ability to achieve seemingly divergent goals -- saving the Union and
freeing slaves -- has won the 1995 Lincoln Prize. The $50,000 prize, which
awards excellence in Civil War studies, was presented last Thursday by the
Lincoln and Soldiers Institute at Gettysburg College.

*Shakespeare Folios and "Tarzan" first editions, as well as other treasures
(like a first edition of H.G. Wells's "Time Machine" with the author's name
misspelled on the title page, and John Lennon's handwritten manuscript of "Lucy
in the Sky With Diamonds") can be found this weekend at the New York Antiquarian
Book Fair. The fair runs from Friday through Sunday at the Park Avenue Armory
(at 68th Street) in Manhattan. For information: (212) 777-5218.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              89 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy

SECTION: Section A;   Page 22;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 346 words


To the Editor:

Your timely April 17 article on wealth inequality in the United States ("Gap in
Wealth in U.S. Called Widest in West," front page), closely following
publication of Robert McNamara's book "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of
Vietnam," prompts me to offer my opinion on the origin of the undesirable trend
of extreme wealth inequality in the United States.

In all the publicity that has accompanied Mr. McNamara's book, practically the
only mention I've noted of the economic consequences of the Vietnam War was in
your April 13 book review: "And McNamara faults President Johnson for failing to
be more forthright with the American public about the growing expense of the
war."

This understates the facts substantially! Lyndon Johnson deliberately lied to
Congress and the American people and escalated the war by stealth, ignoring the
warning of his advisers that the result of a failure to raise taxes to finance
the war would be a dangerous increase in inflation.  Prior to the escalation of
the war the United States economy of the early 1960's was a practically utopian
equilibrium combination of solid growth without inflation.

Johnson's policy set the stage for and began the inflation of the 1970's, which
was made worse by the irrational economic policies of President Nixon and the
unsound ones of Jimmy Carter. The dollar lost nearly half its purchasing power
in the 1970's. This resulted in massive shifts of wealth toward upper-income
groups, who are the owners of businesses and property. The real income of the
lowest 20 percent income class declined substantially, while before 1967, income
distribution among classes had been very stable.

I am of the strong belief that the trend to extreme wealth inequality in the
United States has its origin in President Johnson's failure to finance the
Vietnam War with a tax increase and that this result is one of the most serious
enduring consequences of the ill-conceived Vietnam War.

NEIL NAFTALIN
Minneapolis, April 17, 1995

The writer is a stock market analyst.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              90 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Lugar Says He Will Run for President

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section A;   Page 16;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: INDIANAPOLIS, April 19


Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana today announced his candidacy for the
Republican Presidential nomination, trying to make a virtue of his earnest but
colorless manner by quoting from the Boy Scout oath and depicting himself as a
leader of unblemished character.

As the centerpiece of his campaign, Mr. Lugar put forward his plan to dismantle
the Internal Revenue Service and replace the Federal income tax with a national
sales tax. And, reflecting his foreign policy bent during his four terms in the
Senate, he vowed to emphasize international affairs more than the other
candidates.

But most of all, during his noontime announcement at the plaza outside City
Market, surrounded by well-wishers and the buildings he helped develop as
President Richard Nixon's "favorite Mayor" more than 20 years ago, Mr. Lugar
seemed intent on overcoming his handicaps as a Presidential candidate. Although
he has established himself as the Republicans' leading foreign policy spokesman
and is well respected within Washington, he is little known elsewhere and lacks
the money and organization of his major rivals.

So, he advanced himself as the candidate of substance and straight talk over
glitz and "pandering to this group and that."

Mr. Lugar, 63, opened his speech with a moment of silence for the people killed
this morning in the bombing in Oklahoma City. "My candidacy," he said, "is
grounded on faith that Americans care deeply about their country -- faith that
Americans know that the Presidency is not entertainment, faith that Americans
are not only willing but eager to support a Presidential candidate who offers
straight talk and serious action on the issues that affect their lives and their
children's futures."

After his wife, Charlene, introduced him as "a modest man," and "someone who
believes civility is important," Mr. Lugar spoke of reinvigorating the nation's
moral character and further encouraged the Boy Scout, choir-boy image that
caught on when he first ran for Mayor of Indianapolis at the age of 34. "I have
been a lay minister in the Methodist church," he said. Gently broaching his
opposition to abortion, he went on: "I believe in the sanctity of life. I was an
Eagle Scout, and I pledged, 'On my honor, I will do my best to do my duty to God
and my country.' "

Then, delicately yet unmistakably, Mr. Lugar sought to differentiate himself
from President Clinton, a fellow Rhodes Scholar who avoided the draft during the
Vietnam War.

"As a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford," he said, "I went to the American Embassy in
London and enlisted in the United States Navy."

He served in the Navy during peacetime, from 1957 to 1960.

Mr. Lugar vowed to defy pundits who say that his prospects for winning the
nomination are remote, but his problem goes beyond the fact that he is not
particularly commanding on the stump. In addition to his organizational and
money problems, and his lack of national recognition, some Republicans argue
that his tax plan and focus on foreign policy are not enough to set him apart.

Mr. Lugar's best hope, in the view of some of his advisers, is that Senator Bob
Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, stumbles early, allowing Mr. Lugar to take
support from his fellow Midwest Senator.

But today Mr. Lugar -- whose dreams of national office were put on hold when his
fellow Hoosier and junior Senator, Dan Quayle, was picked as George Bush's
running mate in 1988 -- portrayed himself as more than an standby choice.

"The conventional wisdom of generous columnists seems to be that Dick Lugar
would be a good President," he said. "That he is intelligent, has broad
experience, exercises courage and prudence appropriately -- but that such a
person is rarely nominated or elected." Such thinking, Mr. Lugar asserted, was
"a severe miscalculation of the wisdom of the American people."

Mr. Lugar is the eighth candidate officially to declare for the nomination.
Besides Mr. Dole, the others are Senator Phil Gramm of Texas; Senator Arlen
Specter of Pennsylvania; former Gov. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee; Patrick J.
Buchanan, the conservative commentator; Representative Robert K. Dornan of
California, and Alan Keyes, a former State Department official. The only
expected candidate who has yet to announce or set a date for that, is Gov. Pete
Wilson of California.

Even as Mr. Lugar asserted that the Presidency "is not entertainment," he put on
one of the best orchestrated of all the announcement events, perhaps making up
for his mild manner. The event was packed with boisterous spectators who
continually interrupted the speech with cheers, waved placards, and tossed beach
balls and frisbees embossed with "Lugar." A band played Motown standards. The
spectacle was capped with crackling fireworks that shot red, white and blue
streamers into the audience (and briefly obscured Mr. Lugar in smoke).

The Senator was most specific when he spoke of his plan to replace Federal
income taxes with a national sales tax of 17 percent. "This means for every
American that the money you earn will be yours," he said. "You may save that
money or you may spend that money, but your paycheck will be bigger without the
automatic income withholding deduction."

Underscoring his reputation as one of the leading Republican voices on foreign
policy, Mr. Lugar took issue with the notion that Americans are looking inward
and are not concerned with what happens beyond the nation's borders.

Today's event marked something of a turnabout for Mr. Lugar in Indiana politics.
For years, it was Mr. Quayle who drew the national attention. But on Tuesday,
the former Vice President announced that he would not run for Governor; earlier
this year he opted out of the Presidential race. And today, the best-known
politician from Indiana did not attend Mr. Lugar's announcement.

NAME: Richard G. Lugar

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo:
 Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana greeting well-wishers in Indianapolis after
officially declaring that he will seek the Republican Presidential nomination.
"My candidacy," he said in yesterday's noontime announcement, "is grounded on
faith that Americans care deeply about their country." (Agence France-Presse)

Chart: "Richard Green Lugar"

CURRENT JOB: United States Senator from Indiana

BORN: April 4, 1932, in Indianapolis

EDUCATION: Denison University, B.A., 1954; Pembroke College, Oxford University,
B.A. and M.A., 1956; Shortridge High School, Indianapolis

RELIGION: Methodist

MILITARY SERVICE: United States Navy, 1957-60. Lieutenant Junior Grade.
Intelligence briefer to Adm. Arleigh A. Burke, Chief of Naval Operations.

MARRIED: Charlene Smeltzer in 1956

CHILDREN: Mark, 36; Robert, 34; John, 31, and David, 30

GOVERNMENT POSITIONS: Indianapolis Board of School Commissioners, 1964-67; Mayor
of Indianapolis, 1968-75; United States Senate 1976 to present

OTHER MAJOR POSITIONS: Management of the family's farm and food machinery
company, 1960 to present


TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              91 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy;
Justified Cynicism

SECTION: Section A;   Page 22;   Column 6;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 128 words


To the Editor:

The "savaging" and "denouncing" of cynics by Speaker Newt Gingrich and President
Clinton (Week in Review, April 16) and Frank Rich's prediction that Robert
McNamara's memoir will "compound" rather than lessen cynicism (column, April 16)
overlook two related truths.

Initially, a healthy dose of cynicism about government is justified by much of
recent history, not only by the conduct of the Vietnam War. Railing against
cynicism by political leaders will not accomplish anything. The trust and
optimism the leaders seek among the people must be earned over time, and the
people are more perceptive than the leaders may think.

NORMAN DORSEN
New York, April 17, 1995

The writer is Stokes Professor of Law at New York University.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              92 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy;
North-South Fiction

SECTION: Section A;   Page 22;   Column 6;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


To the Editor:

Your report on Robert McNamara's book on the Vietnam War (front page, April 9)
relates that he now admits that "we were wrong, terribly wrong." But he still
maintains that these were errors "not of values and intentions but of judgment
and capabilities." Throughout your April 12 editorial and in the many letters
you published April 13 and 14, this sacred cow of our "good intentions" is taken
as a given. The most important fact about the Vietnam War is still missing in
action.

The United States-supported regime in southern Vietnam started the violence to
sabotage scheduled all-Vietnam elections. The Geneva Agreements established a
Provisional Military Demarcation Line separating north and south temporarily
until elections scheduled for July 1956. Knowing that Ho Chi Minh would easily
have won free and fair elections, the National Security Council secretly decided
a few days after the Geneva Agreements were reached to sabotage them.

The majority of us who protested against the war did so not because we believed
the war to be unwinnable, but because it was immoral. We believed that the
United States had invaded Vietnam to maintain the fiction that the north and
south were two separate countries, and to thwart all-Vietnam democratic
elections and impose a pro-United States regime in the south. In short: to deny
self-determination to the Vietnamese.

JIM VEEDER
Saugerties, N.Y., April 16, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              93 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy;
Grief and Responsibility

SECTION: Section A;   Page 22;   Column 6;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 215 words


To the Editor:

Robert S. McNamara, as you note in "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12),
must assume responsibility for his role in the Vietnam tragedy.

However, behind Mr. McNamara stood many others, myself included. As a surgeon in
Vietnam in 1969 and 1970, I participated in the war effort, and by my mere
presence supported a war widely recognized by the troops and any who knew
history as unwinnable, if not patently wrong.

I, like others there, and like the majority of the country who supported the
effort, must accept responsibility, too: blame for the 58,000 Americans who
died, blame for the many more whose lives will forever suffer from scars of one
sort or another and blame for the millions of Vietnamese who died and suffered,
and continue to do so.

I feel an awesome grief and responsibility when I read the names of those
relative few I knew (and the many more I did not know) on that black wall in
Washington; pride for having served my country or for my country's decision is
not among my feelings. The war belongs to all who failed to stop it.

The heroes were those innocent people not in a position to object and those who
recognized the wrong and courageously did their part to bring its end.

RICHARD A. BRAND , M.D.
Iowa City, April 15, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              94 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wealth Gap Is Also a Vietnam War Legacy;
McNamara's 'Sinecure'

SECTION: Section A;   Page 22;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


To the Editor:

"Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) gleams with the same "hubristic glow"
of power once enjoyed by our national leaders and now passed by the vagaries of
history to the news media. While your sentiments are surely right and deserve
wide understanding, their target deserves better.

Having worked with Robert McNamara as his spokesman and political adviser for 13
years in the World Bank, I know better, as do many of your colleagues. To say
that his tenure in the bank he made into one of the world's most effective
international institutions was a sinecure ignores your own reporting. Your
thinking is skewed by conventional sentiment, if not by vestiges of hatred
toward the man.

If it had been "Mr. McNamara's war," hostilities would have ended in 1967, and
far fewer people, Vietnamese and American, would have suffered. The name you
give the whole episode belongs to years before commitment of American ground
troops, 1964 and early '65, when the South Vietnamese proved incapable of
defending themselves. In later years Mr. McNamara sought continuously to hold
down our involvement and became the pariah roasted on both left and right.

In the 60's the nation, for good reason, feared nuclear-equipped, strategic
enemies seeking to dominate Asia. That those fears proved unjustified or that
youths who took to the streets to evade service knew better than our leaders was
not at all understood at the time.

Mr. McNamara could easily have left his memoirs to posterity. Instead he has
spoken out, and not for the first time. Your records ought to show, among other
things, that he advised you to publish the Pentagon Papers. He has labored,
perhaps not as hard as he ought, but far more than others, to bring the truth to
light.

JOHN E. MERRIAM
Washington, April 17, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              95 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Kandol Journal;
Cambodia's Agony Lingers, in Death and Blindness

BYLINE: By JOSEPH R. GREGORY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 875 words

DATELINE: KANDOL, Cambodia


In the shade of a sugar palm tree beside a one-room schoolhouse of palm and
bamboo, Dr. Do Seiha examined a farmer's 3-year-old son as dozens of other
children watched with laughter and apprehension.

The boy's pupils were alive with fright, but it was the whites of the eyes that
concerned the doctor. They were dry and strangely wrinkled. The father, a
40-year-old farmer named Sou En, told Dr. Do Seiha that his son had "chicken
blindness," meaning that he cannot see at night.

This symptom of malnutrition is common throughout the third world. But in this
remote village some 70 miles southeast of Phnom Penh, there is an epidemic of
vision problems -- a result of the decades of war that has ruptured the delicate
irrigation system of Cambodia, sown its fields with land mines and killed off
the generation of doctors, engineers and other professionals who would have
speeded its recovery.

When the Khmer Rouge took power on April 17, 1975, they forced the country's
educated people to work alongside farmers on huge rural communes where many
people were killed or died of hunger and disease.  By 1979, when a Vietnamese
invasion ousted the Khmer Rouge, hundreds of thousands and perhaps more than one
million of Cambodia's eight million people had died.

Today, the fields of Vietnam, whose border is 10 miles east of Kandol, are green
and lush. But the 500 people who live here feel the legacy of the Khmer Rouge in
the dry rice paddies around their village.

Asked about his family's diet, Mr. Sou En said that the four oldest of his seven
surviving children spent their days foraging for food, but that last year's
flood and this year's drought had made rice scarce and fruit and vegetables even
harder to find.

As he and the doctor talked, Tun Sok, 47, a nurse wearing a white T-shirt with
the words "Protect Life and Sight, Eat Fruit and Vegetables" in Khmer and
English, fed the boy a capsule of vitamin A.

Behind them, a loudspeaker spread the word that Kandol was being visited by
Government doctors and aid workers from Helen Keller International, an aid
organization based in New York that has set up a program to fight nutritional
blindness in Cambodia.

Elderly people with shaved heads and gold teeth, young families and a couple of
orange-robed Buddhist monks milled about near the village bell -- a piece of
engine casing dangling from a tree. They were joined by half a dozen policemen
with automatic weapons who said they were present for "security."

Keith Feldon, an American who directs Helen Keller's operations in Cambodia,
assured a visitor that around here the Khmer Rouge came out only at night. The
police, he said, were hoping for a tip.

Instead, they were offered a free eye examination.

Along with prescribing routine surgery for cataracts and other ailments, Dr. Do
Seiha and Dr. Yutho Uch were looking for two of the most prevalent causes of
blindness -- vitamin A deficiency and trachoma. The lack of vitamin A dries out
the body's mucous membranes, increasing vulnerability to diarrhea, pneumonia and
other diseases. Trachoma, a bacterial infection that can damage the cornea,
strikes hardest in places without clean water.

Of the 280 children examined on this day, 50 showed symptoms of night blindness,
17 others had eye infections and one little girl had Bitot's spots, foamy white
patches on the whites of the eye that show the eyeballs are starting to
deteriorate. For most of the children, two vitamin A tablets every six months
will prevent night blindness. But for others, little can be done.

"We see so many people who need to go to the hospital," said Mr. Feldon, who has
conducted anti-blindness programs in scores of other Cambodian villages. "But it
does no good for us to take them. We can't take them all. They have to develop
the means to take care of themselves."

To attack nutritional blindness at its root, aid groups are working to help the
villagers obtain inexpensive foot-driven "treadle" pumps that enable farmers to
draw up water that lies just below the ground. Although the pump water is often
not potable, it is clean enough for washing and will help to eliminate trachoma
and make it possible to plant vegetables.

Nevertheless, Cambodia is a long way from regaining its place as a rice
exporter. Though the power of the Khmer Rouge is waning, guerrillas continue to
battle Government troops and to haunt the memories of those who survived their
rule.

"The only way to stay alive was to blend in with everyone else," Mr. Tun Sok
recalled. "They sent me to a commune. I became very thin -- you could see my
bones." Then, with a glint of pride, he added: "But I made a secret history. I
told them I was a farmer. And so I stayed alive."

The aftereffects of the war are felt in other ways. Only three doctors in
Cambodia have formal training in ophthalmology. Food-yielding forests have been
torn down. And land mines, by conservative estimates, kill at least 50 people a
month.

"Life was primitive for these people before the war," Mr. Feldon said. "But the
war made it worse. In Cambodia, you can't talk about development, you have to
talk about rehabilitation. You have to get things back to functioning the way
they were before the war."


LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Helen Keller International, a New York-based aid organization,
is fighting nutritional blindness in Cambodia, where it is rampant. In Kandol, a
remote village near Vietnam, Dr. Do Seiha examined the eyes of children. (Joseph
R. Gregory/The New York Times)

Map of Cambodia shows the location of Kandol.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              96 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV WEEKEND;
Vietnam's Aftereffects In 'Redwood Curtain'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section D;  Page 18;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 497 words


With Robert S. McNamara's public apologia currently rubbing salt in various
Vietnam War wounds, the timing could hardly be better for the "Hallmark Hall of
Fame" presentation of "Redwood Curtain," Sunday night on ABC. Hiding behind this
curtain, in the forests of Northern California, are hundreds, perhaps thousands,
of shattered Vietnam veterans unable to re-adjust to the "normal" world they
left behind. In fairy-tale tradition, this forest is truly haunted.

"Redwood Curtain" has been adapted for television by Ed Namzug from the Lanford
Wilson play, which had a short run on Broadway. A young Asian woman, adopted by
a wealthy California family and aiming for a career as a concert pianist, begins
searching for the identity of her biological father, an American who must be
living somewhere in the United States. A carefully planted clue leads her to the
redwood forest and a confrontation with a homeless veteran who supplies a
crucial link to her past.

Mr. Wilson's play has been expanded. In fact, it has been given an entirely new
first act that brings in the character of the girl's adoptive father, Laird
Riordan, a demon-driven alcoholic who never appeared in the play. Played by John
Lithgow, Laird is a sad yet touchingly sympathetic figure, channeling his own
thwarted musical ambitions into his dearly loved adopted daughter, Geri (played
by Lea Salonga, the original star of "Miss Saigon" on Broadway). Part of Geri's
quest is an effort to deepen her pianistic talent beyond a level that critics
consider merely creditable or proficient. The film encompasses bits of Bach and
Brahms and lots of familiar Satie.

"Redwood Curtain" is somewhat slight and predictable, but given this almost
flawless production, it is also quite moving. Powerfully repeating their
Broadway roles are Jeff Daniels as the disturbed veteran and Debra Monk as
Geri's wonderful aunt, a role that won the gifted Ms. Monk a Tony. Mr. Lithgow
and Ms. Salonga deliver exquisite performances, separately and in tandem. And
not to be overlooked is Catherine Hicks's portrayal, never a caricature, of
Laird's emotionally frigid wife, always preoccupied with her charities.

John Korty, the director, resumes a fruitful relationship, extending back to the
1974 "Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman," with the producers Rick Rosenberg and
Bob Christiansen. Here, obviously, is a project surrounded by solid talent. And
it shows.

HALLMARK HALL OF FAME
Redwood Curtain
ABC, Sunday at 9 P.M.
(Channel 7 in New York.)

Directed by John Korty; written by Ed Namzug, adapted from Lanford Wilson's
play. Produced by Rick Rosenberg and Bob Christiansen in association with
Hallmark Hall of Fame Productions. Brent Shields, co-producer; Francine LeFrak,
co-executive producer; Richard Welsh, executive producer.

WITH: Jeff Daniels (Lyman Fellers), Lea Salonga (Geri Riordan), John Lithgow
(Laird Riordan), Debra Monk (Geneva Simonson) and Catherine Hicks (Julia
Riordan).

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lea Salonga in Lanford Wilson's "Redwood Curtain." (Andrew
Eccles/ABC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              97 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: THE SCIENCE;
Forensic Experts Face Great Problems

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, April 21


Passers-by at Ninth Street and Stonewall hardly notice the gray, one-story
building that houses the Oklahoma Medical Examiner's Office.

But inside, beyond the phalanx of security guards and F.B.I. agents, lies a
charnel house where some of the most famous forensic experts in the world are
trying to match up severed hands, jawbones and flesh with the names of possible
bomb victims.

Under the direction of the medical examiner, Dr. Fred Jordan, the team faces
staggering problems. Although Federal employees killed in the explosion are
relatively easy to identify because they have detailed dental and medical
records, the body parts of others -- especially the children -- are much more
difficult.

The small morgue building is desperately overcrowded with both the dead and the
living. Besides experts in identification, the legion of specialists working in
the building include forensic analysts seeking clues to the identity of the
bombers -- clues that may turn up in residue on pieces of skin, or in other
ways.

The most famous of the experts working at the morgue, where all the victims of
the blast are eventually taken, is Dr. Clyde Collins Snow, an avuncular, 60-ish
chain-smoker whose detective work has helped identify both victims and murderers
in government massacres in Argentina, Chile, Kurdistan and wherever else
state-sanctioned persecution has claimed innocent lives. He has often worked for
human rights groups as well as on special scientific projects.

Dr. Snow, a forensic anthropologist, specializes in bones and the interpretation
of computer analyses of bones of the victims of violence. For many years he
headed a section of the Federal Aviation Administration responsible for
identifying the victims of airplane crashes, and the sight of death on a
horrific scale is nothing new to him.

Dr. Snow's work in Argentina on the "desaparacidos" -- the thousands of
"disappeared" victims of the former military government in Buenos Aires in the
late 1970's and early 1980's -- made him the chief prosecution witness at a
trial of one general responsible for the massacres. In the face of death
threats, he trained teams of young students in Argentina and Chile in techniques
for disinterring the mass graves of the victims, identifying them and
determining the cause of death. Their work sometimes disclosed the calibers and
types of specific firearms.

The work of these teams continues, with Dr. Snow's occasional guidance. He was
one of the experts who identified a skull found in Brazil as that of Josef
Mengele, the Nazi concentration camp doctor, and he recently participated in an
unsuccessful quest in a Bolivian graveyard for the remains of Butch Cassidy and
the Sundance Kid, the turn-of-the-century American outlaws celebrated in the
1969 movie of the same name starring Paul Newman and Robert Redford.

Dr. Snow lives in Norman, Okla., but is often called in to the morgue here to
work on particularly tough cases. During a brief break outside the autopsy
chamber, he said: "We're setting up a data base that should help us through a
lot of the identifications fairly fast. But there's an awful lot to do."

Dr. Snow was under orders not to say anything about his progress or the
procedures at the morgue, but in the past he has explained his methods in
detail. When he has a skull or part of a skull to work with, the first step is
to use calipers and other measuring instruments to determine its exact
dimensions and contours. Later, he compares these with an enormous data base he
and other investigators have compiled, and the computer offers a profile that is
usually close to the truth: the victim's sex, race, health and other details.

Other bones, particularly from the legs, can indicate the victim's height. Age
is measured in many ways. In young children, the extent to which the skull
plates have knitted together show the age. In older adults, age can be estimated
to within less than a decade by the degree of symphysis, or the extent to which
the pubic bones have fused together.

The condition of these bones in a woman can also disclose whether she had
children. The ends of bones are also useful in determining age; arthritic bone
forms deposits on joints, from which age can often be estimated.

Pathologists and forensic experts are relying heavily on medical records that
might mention special conditions, like deviated septums, that might distinguish
people.

"I've always preferred to work with bones because they're so much neater," Dr.
Snow once said.

But the remains of the bombing victims that arrive at the morgue include much
more than bones. There are fragments of disembodied flesh that may never be
reunited with the bodies from which they were ripped by the explosion Wednesday
at the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building here.

Still, pathologists can identify even scraps of mangled flesh when full analysis
is essential to determining the identity of the victim. Like any other
biological tissue, flesh contains blood that can be typed, and DNA that can be
matched with samples of hair or other biological material that relatives of a
victim might possess.

The scale of death in the explosion here is enormous as a terrorist act but,
compared with major airplane disasters, it is not unusual. After a plane crash,
pathologists lay out body parts and try to match them the best they can.
Inevitably, however, many parts are left unidentified, and must be placed almost
at random in the graves of the victims.

Terrorist bombing attacks during the Vietnam War often involved hundreds or
thousands of pounds of explosive, and often the victims who were missing were
never identified; too little was left to match with anything. In such cases,
remains were simply buried in mass graves.

Forensic experts have faced similar horrors in Lebanon, Northern Ireland and
elsewhere. And wherever explosives claim lives, the "witnesses from the grave,"
as Dr. Snow calls the bodies of the victims, are often obliterated.

"But we succeed more often than many people might ever imagine," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "TECHNIQUES: Indentifying the Victims"

Fingerprints -- Since fingerprint of all Federal employees is on file, this may
be the easiest way to identify many victims, provided their fingerprints are
intact.

Medical Records -- X-rays, dental records and other medical records like blood
type are all helpful for identification. For example, an X-ray or virtually any
part of the body can have distinctive characteristics.

DNA Testing -- Though expensive and cumbersome, DNA testing can be a reliable
option, especially when only bits of bone or flesh remain of victims. DNA from
close biological relatives can be compared with remains for possible matches.

Detective Work -- When all esle fails, examiners can try to identify victims by
comparing hair color, skin color or distinguishing marks like scars or tatoos.
or by determining the likely size, weight or age of the victim by looking at the
remains.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              99 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7;    Page 23;    Column 1;    Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 787 words


Matthew Marshall, an industrialist worth more than $100 million, dies of a
stroke at the age of 51. A couple of months earlier, unbeknown to his wife and
their three children, he added a codicil to his will. It seems that Marshall had
fathered a child in Vietnam. He never knew if it was a son or a daughter, but he
had reason to believe that the child might have come to the United States. Half
of his estate will go to this person if he or she can be located. That's how Tom
Topor's new thriller, THE CODICIL (Hyperion, $21.95), begins.

Adam Bruno, a former criminal lawyer and now a private investigator in New York,
is hired by Marshall's lawyer to find the heir. Smart, tough, laconic, Bruno
tries to discover all he can about the industrialist's military career. That
means interviewing men who served with him, unearthing old records, tangling
with a loony, dangerous veteran and in general stirring things up.

The story is told in lean, precise, unsentimental prose that avoids cliche. The
author, a former newspaperman, writes like a skilled reporter, never
editorializing, dispassionately recounting some of the horrors of the sad
American venture into Vietnam. Mr. Topor, who also wrote the play "Nuts" and the
screenplay for "The Accused," is not a prolific novelist. But anybody who
remembers "Coda," which he published 10 years ago, will not be surprised by his
expertise.

THE MAGNIFICENT SIBERIAN, by Louis Charbonneau (Donald I. Fine, $21.95), can
best be described as an eco-thriller. It takes us into a remote corner of the
world, eastern Siberia, where an American biologist is working with Russian
colleagues on ways of keeping the Siberian tiger from becoming extinct.

They battle poachers, the corrupt Russian bureaucracy, a former K.G.B. killer
and a fanatical right-wing general who has grand ideas about restoring a
dictatorship. Mr. Charbonneau, the author of "Stalk," "White Harvest" and many
other novels, is clearly a student of the new capitalist Russia, and he is
appalled by the way organized crime has taken over there.

Mr. Charbonneau has created a lively melange. He even takes us on a guided tour
of Vladivostok, a city rather off the tourist beat. There is a mysterious femme
fatale, but the book's real heroine is a Siberian tiger with three cubs who has
been wounded by a poacher. The author will have you cheering her on.

Former military officers can be very good at action novels, but how many of them
are real writers? Maynard Allington, a retired Air Force lieutenant colonel who
served in Vietnam and is the author of "The Grey Wolf" and "The Fox in the
Field," is one of those rarities: a military man who is also a deft writer.

In THE COURT OF BLUE SHADOWS (Brassey's, $22.95), he takes us back to Germany
just before World War II. The central figure is an Aryan-looking type who learns
that his father is a Jew. Most of this beautifully written book has to do with
the psychology of a young man who mistakenly thought he was one of the German
elite.

There is plenty of action, with a finale in Brazil that involves former Nazis
and looted art works. But this is not a typical adventure story. Rather, it is a
sensitive and powerful examination of humanity at its worst and at its best.

When is the last time you encountered sentences like "Reason to suspect foul
play" and "The game was afoot"? In the works of Arthur Conan Doyle, of course.
Maybe somewhere in Agatha Christie. And now in SILENT TREATMENT, by Michael
Palmer (Bantam, $21.95).

This is a medical thriller with all-too-familiar components: a physician
suspected of killing his wife, a sadistic murderer who was once a doctor, a
big-league insurance scam involving important people and other odds and ends.
Dr. Harry Corbett, the accused man, has to overcome all kinds of perils. "Silent
Treatment" is completely routine.

Philip McCutchan, who has written more than 100 adventure novels, now offers
APPRENTICE TO THE SEA (St. Martin's, $17.95). It reads as if it had been written
between breakfast and lunch.

Set in the late 19th century, this short book is about Tom Chatto, a midshipman
who is taking his first trip on a windjammer. There is a minimum of plot, and
the story ends abruptly, long before the trip is over. "Apprentice to the Sea"
covers the usual topics: a hurricane and a stowaway, the rigors of rounding Cape
Horn and the problems of a new deckhand.

Of course, the author knows his subject. If your taste runs to prose on the
order of "Tom would have to learn the difference between standing and running
rigging, between guys and braces and downhauls, clew lines and gaskets and
buntlines, garnets and halyards and sheets to name a few," then Mr. Mc Cutchan
is your man.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              100 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ASIA-PACIFIC ISSUE;
Discovering A Village In Vietnam

BYLINE: By ANN CRITTENDEN

SECTION: Section 5;   Page 12;   Column 1;   Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2296 words


THE village, an old French hill station built in 1922 in the remote mountains of
northwest Vietnam, had had almost no Western visitors since before World War II.
It rates only four short paragraphs in the Lonely Planet guidebook, the bible of
offbeat travelers. But this past year the buzz started on Sa Pa.

"I would guess that maybe 50 people from Aspen are traveling in Vietnam right
now," said an art dealer whom we met at our hotel in Sa Pa, "but I'm one of the
first to make it up here." A carpenter from England said he had been there for
10 weeks. "I've been on the road for 10 months in Asia," said a young Israeli,
"and this is one of the best spots."

From middle-aged Belgians to young Canadians, the consensus was the same: This
is a scene in the making, like Nepal 20 or 30 years ago -- picturesque,
unspoiled and incredibly inexpensive.

The three of us -- my husband, a film producer friend and myself -- had never
planned to go to Sa Pa. We had never even heard of the place until we were more
than halfway across the Pacific on our way to Hanoi, our first stop on a
three-week vacation in Vietnam last November. But we had wanted to stay loose
and go where our fancy took us, and a mention of the town in an airline magazine
piqued our imagination.

A Vietnam veteran we met on the plane said the best place in Hanoi to find out
about trips into the hinterland was the Green Bamboo, a hangout of many young
Europeans (and, increasingly, Americans). Most are adventurous long-haired
college graduates who look exactly like the hippies of 20 years ago, only now
they are called backpackers and may be entering Harvard Business School next
semester.

The Green Bamboo turned out to be a small cafe on a leafy side street near the
old section of Hanoi. The walls were covered with trip sign-up sheets, including
one for Sa Pa. On the other side of the room was a bulletin board of travelers'
tips and messages. Someone had drawn a little map of "downtown" Sa Pa, with
arrows showing the best restaurants and how to find good, inexpensive vegetarian
food. We weren't sure what would be waiting at the end of the road, but we were
ready to sign up.

A young Belgian couple suggested an alternative to the sign-up sheet: an
overnight train, leaving on a Friday night and returning Sunday night. We could
see the colorful weekend market and save precious time in Vietnam by not having
to spend two days on a bus getting up to the village and back.

Why not?

Well, first, because we had to buy the ticket. We spent about 40 minutes walking
within, outside and around the train station before we found the separate
building where these particular tickets were sold. We handed the clerk a note
that the staff at our hotel had written for us in Vietnamese, explaining that we
wanted three first-class sleeper berths.

She wrote the price on the note and handed it back. It was hundreds of thousands
of Vietnamese dong -- about $20 a person one way (they couldn't sell round-trip
tickets for some unexplained reason). We dug into our fanny packs and started
fishing out dollars, the currency of choice in Vietnam. No, she shook her head.
The railroad could not take dollars. Only dong.

This necessitated a trip to the bank, where we traded dollars into several giant
wads of dong. Their condition reminded me of an observation in a wonderful old
travel book on Indochina by the English writer Norman Lewis. He speculated that
waiters gave him the filthiest bank notes as change, hoping he would rather
leave them on the table than touch them.

Another trip to the station, before the overnight sleepers were sold out.

Our "first class" sleeping compartment had six narrow bunks, three on each side,
hard and bare. Someone had passed out blankets, but we had arrived too late and
missed them. The other beds in our compartment were already occupied by three
Vietnamese men, and when I saw the crowd, and the beds that awaited us on our
12-hour journey, I started to crack.

"I don't think I can do this," I wailed. My friend, whose idea of a good time is
a week in St. Moritz, didn't bat an eye. My husband was game. So I did it. As it
turned out, we had a terrific picnic of dried ham, cheese, bread and wine
purchased from the Metropole Hotel in Hanoi, and then quickly fell asleep to the
clackety-clack rhythm of the old train. Only my husband showed any ill effects
later -- his back was out for weeks after that night's hard ride.

WE disembarked at dawn in Lao Cai, on the border with China, and boarded a bus
for the last 25 miles to Sa Pa. The road climbed up through a verdant river
valley and then wound up into the mountains that the French dubbed the
"Tonkinese Alps" and the Vietnamese call the Hoang Lien. The road was a work in
progress; paved only in spots, and full of crews still working to repair the
damage done during the rainy season. In Hanoi we had just seen film clips
showing similar crews building roads and hauling heavy artillery up to the
French outpost at Dien Bien Phu, a few miles to the southeast of our destination
(but days away by rough mountain roads).

The French had abandoned Sa Pa during their colonial war against the Vietnamese
nationalists, which began in 1946 and ended after the fall of Dien Bien Phu in
1954. There are two good reasons to make the arduous journey to Sa Pa, to see
the local hill tribes during the weekend market and to walk in the mountains
surrounding the town, which perches on a 4,920-foot plateau surrounded by higher
peaks. From there, serious hikers can arrange to climb Fan Si Pan, at 10,300
feet the highest mountain in Vietnam, and only about six miles from Sa Pa. That
trek takes several days, but there are numerous short day or half-day hikes to
nearby villages and waterfalls, all marked on a map available locally.

Sa Pa itself was reminiscent of a Himalayan village, with few signs of the brief
French colonial presence. It never had been much of a town on the scale of the
British hill stations in India, and all that's left of the French presence is a
handful of nondescript prewar buildings, including a church. Our first stop was
the market, a modest affair of shops and stalls selling basic foods and supplies
like hoe handles, rubber boots, blankets and pots and pans. Tables and benches
were set up in a large roofed area, where women had set up simple kitchens to
fry doughnuts and simmer bowls of delicious noodle soup, filled with bean
sprouts and various herbs, all for 50 cents.

The central attraction for us was the crowd: tribal villagers who still wear
their traditional dress, and who are untouched by the mixed blessings of mass
tourism. This area of Vietnam has not seen Westerners since the 1930's, and the
Hmong, Zao and Tay tribes are still firmly rooted in their culture -- although
not for much longer, judging from the steadily increasing flow of Western
tourists.

The bazaar resembled a scene from a film about medieval Tatars. There were men
from the "black" Hmong tribe, wearing dark skullcaps, indigo homespun tunics
with embroidered collars over long shirts and wide pants, held together by wide,
embroidered belts. One man grinned at me, revealing four bright gold teeth.
Another looked dashing with a loop of silver metal around his neck, five or six
hammered brass bracelets on one arm and a carved dagger stuck in his belt.

The women were even more spectacular, particularly those from the "red" Zao
villages. Each had a huge folded red cloth, decorated with silver coins and
large red tassles, piled high on her head like the headdress worn by an
Alice-in-Wonderland duchess. Their long red embroidered tunics were sewn with
beads and tassles, and they carried themselves like rustic royalty.

Another group, mostly older women, didn't have time for the luxury of dignity;
they were too busy surrounding us and showing us samples of their embroidery.
Some were lovely, and we spent what must have been hours looking at hundreds of
pieces, selecting delicate patterns in purples, blues, greens, and red and
yellow, traced on belts, on sashes with long black fringes, and on cotton
jackets, made from fabrics dyed the darkest blue by the women themselves. Our
bargaining consisted of holding up two or three fingers; we bought the belts and
sashes for between $2 and $3, in local currency.

That afternoon we negotiated with several of the young men waiting on their
motorbikes at the head of the market steps. For $2 each they agreed to take us
to a footpath about three miles out of town, leading toward a Hmong village. The
hills were almost entirely deforested and covered with terraced rice paddies,
yellow and brown in the November sun. Beyond marched row after row of ever
steeper mountains as far as we could see. They evoked the wilderness on a
Chinese painted scroll. But this was Vietnam, one of the most heavily populated
countries in the world, and we were in fact surrounded by people.

Most of them were children, many dressed like little copies of their elders, and
they were busy watching pigs and water buffaloes rooting around in the harvested
rice fields. Some of the children ran up to us and made little circular motions
with their index finger in the palm of their hand; we realized that they were
asking for pens.

THE children here and elsewhere in Vietnam happily played games that no longer
amuse our own video-besotted offspring. We saw kids spinning tops, snapping a
piece of hide fastened to the end of a stick, making bows and arrows out of
bamboo, and jumping rope. Innocent fun. Even the dogs seemed plump and naive,
unaware that they were living in a country that eats dog -- a fact that may not
be altogether unrelated to their well-fed appearance.

On the other hand, all was not straight out of the "Sound of Music" in these
mountains. One wizened old lady in the crowd trying to sell us textiles held out
a small brown ball. "You like?" she asked hopefully. I admit I wasn't sure what
it was. The next day I found out. Relaxing in a roadside drink shop after a long
hike, the proprietor asked if we wanted opium with our Cokes. Apparently at
least a few visitors come for more than scenery, even though opium is illegal.

On our second day we decided to walk down to the river, a short distance, but
straight down and back up. We passed the stark ruins of a French villa with an
180-degree view of the hazy mountains. We walked through villages noisy with
farm animals. We passed long strands of wet, newly dyed cloth, hung out to dry
on wooden fences, and an ingenious device that used river water to lift and
smash a heavy weight onto a container of unhusked rice.

We balanced our way over a swaying bamboo bridge to an abandoned stone cottage
that looked like a French provincial dream house alongside a waterfall. We read
our books by the river, and felt as if we were in Europe or Nepal -- or anywhere
but the Vietnam of the fevered American imagination.



Visitor's guide to the country
When to Go

The best month is April, when the days are sunny and warm, the nights pleasantly
cool and the hills a brilliant spring green. March and May are fine, and October
and November offer lovely days but cold nights. Temperatures drop to near
freezing by November. Winter is cold and foggy; summer is the rainy season.

For a visa, send for an application to the Permanent Mission of Vietnam to the
United Nations, 20 Waterside Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10010, (212) 679-3779. A visa
costs $75 and takes about two weeks.

Getting There

The train leaves Hanoi around 8 P.M. and arrives in Lao Cai early in the
morning. From there, a bus ($4) or a motorbike ($7) will take you on to Sa Pa.
Travelers not wishing to brave the overnight sleeper can take a bus. They can
sign up for tours at the Green Bamboo Cafe, 42 Nha Chung Street, and at the
Darling Cafe, 33 Hang Quat Street. The bus, direct to Sa Pa, takes 12 to 14
hours and departs early Friday morning, returning Monday. The cost, including
three nights at a guesthouse, is $45. More expensive, but more comfortable
transportation by car and driver can be easily arranged with a travel agency in
Hanoi. Prices are negotiable, but should be about $60 to $100 a day. Rooms are
extra.

Where to Stay

Hotel staff people in Sa Pa speak very limited English, so it may be best to
have your hotel in Hanoi call ahead. As recently as a year ago, virtually the
only place to stay in Sa Pa was the government guesthouse, but now there are as
many as a dozen privately owned mini-hotels, averaging about six rooms each,
scattered throughout the tiny village. Our hotel (whose name was not readily
apparent) was a brand-new yellow stucco villa with wooden shutters and a tile
roof a few steps up from where the bus stops in the middle of town. It was so
new that it had no telephone number or business cards. We paid $14 for a large
room with three single beds and a small balcony. (The lights went out briefly
three times one night, so you might want to take candles or a flashlight.)

The guesthouse was a rambling white building on the edge of town. Its smallish
rooms cost $15 a night for a double. Call 0120-71230.

Another new mini-hotel with a terrace and a spectacular view of the mountains is
the Hotel Phuong Nam. Its tiny rooms cost $10 for a double. Telephone
0120-71286.

Where to Eat

We ate almost all our meals at the Auberge Dang Trung, a simple vegetarian cafe
with an outdoor terrace looking out over the mountains. The favorite of Western
visitors to Sa Pa, its fixed dinner menu of spring rolls, soup, rice, french
fries, pickled vegetables and grilled fish set us back a little more than $1 a
person. We ate lunch one day in the market -- a steaming bowl of noodle and
vegetable soup for about 50 cents.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A young girl from the Zao tribe in Sa Pa. (Pam Peabody)(pg.
26); The market area, with Hmong and Vietnamese women. Manager of the Phuong
Nam, one of about a dozen small hotels around Sa Pa. (Photographs by Pam
Peabody)(pg. 12)

Map of northern Vietnam.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              101 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

To Insurers, Terrorism Is Not Like War

BYLINE: By PATRICK McGEEHAN;    Patrick McGeehan is a freelance writer in
Hoboken, N.J.

SECTION: Section 3;   Page 13;   Column 1;   Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


AFTER the devastating explosion of a Federal office building in Oklahoma City on
Wednesday, many Americans may be wondering whether terrorism has become a fact
of modern life. So far, insurance companies don't think so.

How can you tell? Because big insurers, which try to measure the dangers of
virtually all aspects of human behavior, don't treat bombings as a special case.
In general, they pay without hesitation the claims filed by victims of such
events and their beneficiaries.

Just as in the World Trade Center bombing two years ago, the families of those
who died in Oklahoma City should receive life insurance benefits, industry
experts said. Insurers also should pay off claims by holders of policies that
cover accidental death and dismemberment.

Accidental death coverage often comes in the form of a supplement to a life
insurance policy. It allows the policyholder, for a small cost, to double or
triple the benefit if a death occurs by accident. Nearly all deaths not from
natural causes are considered accidental, even murders.

Among the common exceptions to the rule are deaths induced by illicit drugs and
those resulting from war. Many policies include clauses that expand the
definition of war to include "warlike" conditions. That caveat was added to
cover the Vietnam War, which was undeclared. But it has never been invoked in
cases of terrorist acts, experts said.

"There is a war exclusion in some life policies that did come into play during
the Gulf War, but companies try with great effort not to use that clause," said
Steven Goldstein, senior vice president with the Insurance Information
Institute.

State Farm Insurance offers accidental death and dismemberment coverage as a
supplement to both life and health insurance policies. A holder of a State Farm
health policy with the supplemental coverage who died or lost limbs in
Wednesday's bombing could collect as much as $25,000. The beneficiary of a life
insurance policyholder, with supplemental accident coverage, could collect
double the principal of the life policy, up to $250,000.

Only about 8 percent of State Farm's life policyholders and 2 percent of its
health policyholders have the supplemental coverage, said a company spokeswoman,
Stephanie Fagerstrom.

The accident coverage typically is less costly than life insurance, usually
running about $1 per year for each $1,000 of coverage.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              102 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Even Now, There's Money to Be Made in Japan

BYLINE: By EDWARD WYATT

SECTION: Section 3;   Page 9;   Column 1;   Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words


MUTUAL fund investors would be hard pressed to find a more contrarian bet than
Japan. The Japanese economy is in serious trouble, in part because the soaring
yen makes its goods so expensive in falling dollars.

But after a devastating first quarter, a number of portfolio managers and
investors have started creeping back into Japanese equities. And so far, the
wager has paid off.

The bellwether Nikkei 225 index, which fell more than 18 percent in the first
three months of 1995, has risen 5.1 percent this month. To some, that looks like
a classic example of what the trade calls a "dead cat bounce" -- a reaction to
the fall, not a sign of life. But other signs point to renewed interest in Japan
as well.

Three weeks ago -- for the first time this year -- investors put in more money
than they withdrew from the five largest Japan stock funds, according to AMG
Data Services, a fund research company in Arcata, Calif. Last week, a four-week
moving average showed $2.7 million in new cash, double the amount a week
earlier, for those funds.

Some managers are also encouraged by technical analysis, which uses charts of
previous performance to predict future stock prices. Several times in the last
three years, the Nikkei average has fallen close to 15,000, as it did in late
March, and then rebounded sharply, gaining 20 to 30 percent over the next two
quarters.

"The Japanese market offers the opportunity for a very profitable move over the
next six to nine months," said Charles E. Cain, president of Cain Asset
Management, a New York money manager who specializes in picking mutual funds for
clients.

One mutual fund that's been buying in Japan is Merrill Lynch Pacific. "As the
Japanese stock market has dropped, we've been adding to our position all year,"
said Steve Silverman, manager of the fund, which carries a 5.25 percent sales
charge. It now has 65 percent of its $1.5 billion in assets in Japan, up from 56
percent at the start of the year. The fund, up 0.9 percent this year, doesn't
try to predict the market's overall direction. However, Mr. Silverman said,
"We're finding a lot of individual companies that look like great values."

Japanese funds have moved higher this month in large part because of the falling
dollar. The Japan Fund, which is the largest of the group specializing in Japan
with $487 million in assets, has risen 3.9 percent, to $9.39 a share. To the
extent that mutual funds investing in Japan don't hedge their currency risk,
American investors benefit from a stronger yen and a weaker dollar.

The opposite, of course, is also true, which explains the vast difference in
performance among the nine Japanese funds tracked by Lipper Analytical Services,
a funds research company. For the year through Thursday, the tiny Wright
Equifund-Japanese, whose $9.7 million in assets aren't hedged against currency
effects, gained 0.7 percent. Warburg Pincus Japan did hedge its $24.5 million in
assets -- and declined 21.3 percent through Thursday. (Both funds are too small
to appear in this newspaper's daily mutual fund listings.)

If the currency trend reverses, as it showed signs of doing last week, the top
and bottom performers could switch places, because the funds that hedge would
benefit. The stock market also stands to benefit from a weaker yen, since the
Japanese economy is dependent on sales of its products abroad.

"What's caused the Japanese funds to rise so far this month -- the strength of
the yen -- is negative for the stock market," Mr. Cain said. "If the yen
stabilizes or comes down, in the long run that will be good for Japanese stocks.
I'm inclined to believe that will happen."

The technical signs are promising for the Nikkei index, Mr. Cain said. The
Nikkei average's weekly closing prices have ranged from about 15,000 to 21,000
for nearly three years. Each time the index has fallen sharply and hit the lower
level, it has rebounded, reaching the upper limit within several months.

The recent strength could be setting the stage for an upward move in the Nikkei
average of 20 percent to 30 percent by the end of the year.

To take advantage of that possibility, Mr. Cain said he is considering buying
some Japanese specialty funds. "A well diversified position within a portfolio
would measure about 15 to 25 percent" of assets, he said.

Of course, the yen might continue to strengthen, the Japanese economy might
slump further and the Nikkei average could fall below 14,500, the level it last
visited in August 1992.

Some international specialists consider that more than a mere possibility. David
Herro, portfolio manager of the $877 million Oakmark International fund, has no
assets in Japan, and doesn't plan to start investing there anytime soon.

"If anything, the fundamentals in Japan are getting worse instead of better,"
Mr. Herro said. While interest rates might appear to be almost as low as they
can go -- the Bank of Japan lowered its discount rate to 1 percent recently --
Mr. Herro said that because Japan is in a deflationary cycle, real interest
rates are two to three percentage points higher. "That's not as low as one might
expect for this economy," he said.

Mr. Herro predicted that the Japanese economy must go through much more
fundamental restructuring before it can strengthen significantly. "The stock
market is off 50 percent from its highs, but that was an inflated high," he
said. "It's still overvalued by 20 percent to 40 percent."

Clearly, Japan has serious economic problems that aren't likely to be solved in
a few months. But with pessimism about Japan so widespread and the Nikkei
average down so far this year, some money managers see immediate promise in a
few sectors of the Japanese economy.

About 27 percent of Franklin Pacific Growth fund's $51 million in assets is
invested in Japan. William Howard, the portfolio manager, owns companies that
should hold up relatively well in a slow or declining economy and that he
expects to do well in the next five years. He likes East Japan Railway, a
passenger rail company; Mitsubishi Oil, a refiner that's exploring for oil off
the coast of Vietnam, and Nippon Telephone and Telegraph.

Mr. Silverman, manager of the Merrill Pacific fund, favors Ito-Yokado, a big
retailer. While many economists cite a reluctance by Japanese consumers to spend
as a reason for the faltering economy, Mr. Silverman said, "If people are going
to shop, they're going to shop at Ito-Yokado."

He also disputes the notion that Japanese companies can't change, noting that
Ito-Yokado owns Southland Corporation, the United States parent of the 7-Eleven
convenience store chain. "Everybody says the Japanese can't restructure," Mr.
Silverman said, "but they've done a great job of restructuring Southland."

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Cash Begins to Return Despite Problems" shows the net flow of
money in the five largest Japan funds and those funds that expected the dollar
to recover (Sources: AMG Data Services; Lipper Analytical Services; Morningstar
Inc.)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              103 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

April 16-22;
When Good Republicans Make Bad Moves

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 2;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


"POLITICS is just like show business," Ronald Reagan once observed. "You have a
hell of an opening, you coast for a while, you have a hell of a closing."

Well, the curtain has gone up on eight contenders for the Republican
Presidential nomination. While their openings were hardly worthy of Hollywood
(or of Ronald Reagan, for that matter), the debut announcement speeches do tell
people something about the candidates. And some moments, and some passages,
stood out:

Most Baffling Site Selection

At a time when the Capitol dome is a backdrop only for attack commercials,
Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania defied conventional wisdom (and
anti-Washington sentiment) by staging his announcement smack in the middle of
what one rival, former Gov. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, calls the "arrogant
empire." He delivered his speech in the shadow of the Washington Monument, with
the Lincoln Memorial right behind him.

Considering that Mr. Specter picked a popular tourist site, it was all the more
surprising that he couldn't assemble more than 200 to stand around and watch
him. His aides scrambled to stock the audience with unknowing passersby. They
had little luck.

Most Venue Problems

To drive home his message about restoring power to the states, Senator Bob Dole
of Kansas planned an elaborate announcement at the steps of the Capitol in
Topeka. But this was Kansas. And while no tornado materialized, foul weather
forced the event inside, to a nondescript arena.

Mr. Dole tried again later in the week, in Raleigh, N.C., with another version
of the speech. It was a beautiful spring day. The event was set for the Capitol.
But local officials would not allow a political event at a Government building.
So Mr. Dole moved into a hotel ballroom. At least, unlike the commentator
Patrick J. Buchanan, Mr. Dole got to open his speech without interruption by
protesters jumping on stage.

Most Dubious Opening

Rather than cancel, Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana went ahead with his
announcement on Wednesday, only hours after the explosion in Oklahoma City. He
opened with a moment of silence for the victims. But few will know what he said.

"It's going to go down in history as the speech that shouldn't have been given
the day it was given," said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School
for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania. "He should have made a
statement that it was inappropriate to announce on a day of national mourning.
And he could not compete for press or psychological attention from the public."

Most Misspent Oratory

Alan Keyes, a radio talk show host, brought the crowd to its feet as he vowed
not to abandon the fight against abortion. His speech had the intensity, the
fervor, of an old-time oration. But some in the audience -- at a conservative
convention in San Diego -- wore buttons for other candidates. For much as they
liked the show, many did not think Mr. Keyes has a chance.

Most Incongruous Theme

Given that Senator Phil Gramm of Texas got several military deferments during
the Vietnam War, it was surprising that he choreographed an announcement that
looked like a show of military force.

There were uniformed cadets everywhere at Texas A & M University, where Mr.
Gramm taught economics. The Senator arrived on stage by walking through cadets'
raised sabers. And the event closed with the roar of cannons.

The police-state imagery delighted advisers to Senator Dole, a wounded hero of
World War II. One critic said Mr. Gramm may as well have put a sign over his
head proclaiming, "I never served."

Most Snickers

Lamar Alexander, a millionaire, was skewered by the inside-the-Beltway
commentators for taking to the stage as a populist in a plaid work shirt.

But Mr. Alexander, who is registering nowhere in the polls, at least got a
little attention. "Every pundit in Washington, D.C., hated the plaid shirt,"
said Mark Merritt, Mr. Alexander's spokesman. "So we knew we were doing
something right."

Lamest Portrait of a Nice Guy

This, from Representative Robert K. Dornan of California, explaining why he has
the temperament to be President: "Well, ladies and gentlemen, here's one
Congressman that has never yelled at his staff; tried to motivate my children by
example, not by harshness; that has never in subcommittee or committee or at a
press conference ever showed anything but passion."

Most Memorable Line

Mr. Gramm gets the honors. Not from his actual announcement speech, but from a
speech in Dallas the night before, at the kick-off of his announcement tour.
Surrounded by friends and supporters who raised millions for his campaign, he
had offered these less-than-heartwarming words: "I have the most reliable friend
that you can have in American politics, and that is ready money."

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: And the candidates are (from left): Gramm, Alexander, Buchanan,
Keyes, Specter, Dole, Dornan and Lugar.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              104 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Energy-Hungry, Asia Embraces Nuclear Power

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 4;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


IT'S difficult to imagine the hulking towers of a nuclear power plant rising up
from the emerald-green rice paddies of Vietnam, a nation so poor that most
people still depend on cooking over an open fire and lighting their homes with
oil lamps. But this month, the Vietnamese Government announced that it was
considering a proposal from South Korea to build two nuclear reactors here at a
cost of $3 billion.

Vietnam is one of the few Asian nations blessed by large deposits of fossil fuel
-- it has huge tracts of offshore oil -- but its leaders are eager not to be
left behind in the nuclear-power binge sweeping Asia.

Nuclear power is an industry in crisis in the West, the result both of the panic
produced by the accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl and of the
multi-billion-dollar cost overruns that have plagued nuclear-energy projects
throughout Europe and the United States. No new nuclear plants have been ordered
in the United States since 1979.

But if the nuclear-energy genie is dying in the West, he is being reborn in
Asia. The booming, fuel-hungry nations across the region are ordering and
building nuclear plants at a rate not seen in decades.

Fail-Safe?

There are already 115 commercial and research reactors in operation in East
Asia, most in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and China. In the next decade, dozens
of new reactors are expected to built across the continent at a cost of more
than $100 billion.

Asian leaders say they have no choice but to develop nuclear power given the
explosive rate at which the demand for energy is growing. The International
Atomic Energy Agency has predicted that power demands in Asia will triple by
2015.

But while reactors may power Asia's thriving economies into the next century,
they also pose problems of safety and cost that the West has been tangling with
unsuccessfully throughout the atomic age.

It is a subject now under scrutiny at the United Nations, where diplomats opened
talks last week on extending the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The
25-year-old treaty, which is about to expire, was designed to limit the spread
of nuclear arms in part by allowing inspection of power plants to verify that
atomic material is not diverted to weapons use. But evidence from North Korea
has shown that a determined government could use civil nuclear programs as a
cover for weapons development, and the spread of nuclear power in Asia has
raised new concerns about proliferation.

Anti-nuclear advocates are dismayed. "It's the first world dumping old,
dangerous technology on the developing world," said Jean McSorley, who directs
anti-nuclear campaigns in Asia for Greenpeace. "We're encouraging them to repeat
the same mistakes that we made."

Environmental groups say they take little solace from the fact that most of the
plants now being built in Asia are of Western design, and that they incorporate
hard-earned lessons about safety. They have called on Asian nations to shun
atomic energy in favor of conservation and the use of safer energy sources.
Solar energy, they say, would be a natural choice in much of sun-baked Southeast
Asia.

No Asian nation has embraced nuclear energy more enthusiastically than China,
which opened its first commercial complex only last year but has plans for 30
more reactors. Last month, it announced a shifting in national energy policy to
encourage the development of nuclear power over hydropower and thermal energy,
the priorities until now. "We are energetically developing nuclear power," said
Yao Qiming, a government energy official. "It is our future."

Western companies are rushing in with proposals to build reactors. In January,
China awarded three French firms a $3 billion contract to build two nuclear
plants in Guangdong Province. Few in the industry were surprised when the
chairmen of Westinghouse and General Electric, both of which design or build
nuclear plants, showed up in Beijing last year for talks.

"The energy growth in Asia is just astonishing, and their move to nuclear energy
shows that the nations of Asia understand the value of having a mix of energy
resources -- and the value of nuclear energy," said Angie McBrien of the Nuclear
Energy Institute, an industry lobbying group.

But if the Clinton Administration is eager to see American companies benefit
from the development of atomic power in China, it has been dismayed by what has
gone on in North Korea, the nation that more than any in Asia had proved the
dangers of the unrestrained nuclear development.

Temptations

Until last year, North Korea appeared bent on using spent fuel from a reactor to
make weapons-grade plutonium. Under an agreement with the United States, the
plant is to be shut down in return for safer reactors designed to limit the risk
of diversion.

Negotiations to implement that agreement have been on-again, off-again. At the
same time, some critics fear that other Asian countries that until now have
disavowed ambitions for nuclear arms may be tempted to reconsider.

"My worst-case scenario is that every country in the region would get a couple
of reactors with the idea that they want to keep their military options open,"
said Ms. McSorley of Greenpeace. The options are wide open in India and
Pakistan, both of which have diverted nuclear material from power plants to the
making of weapons that they might use against one another. Unlike most Asian
nations, neither India nor Pakistan has signed the non-proliferation pact.

In Southeast Asia, Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia are all in varying stages of
nuclear development. Indonesia is about to take bids for its first nuclear
plant.

The governments of South Korea, Japan and Taiwan already support some of the
world's most sophisticated nuclear-power programs. In South Korea, nuclear power
provides more than 40 percent of all the electricity generated in the country;
in Japan and Taiwan, the figure is about 30 percent. The Japanese Government has
proposed the construction of at least 15 new nuclear reactors by 2010, and it is
now pursuing the commercial use of fast-breeder reactors, which use plutonium
for fuel.

The rush to nuclear power would not be so worrying if Asian leaders could
guarantee that they would remain at peace. Since the Vietnam War, Asians have
enjoyed a remarkable neighborliness. One reason for the region's economic
success is that most governments have not been forced to spend a crippling
portion of their budget on arms.

But military historians say it is only a matter of time before the collegiality
of the region breaks down. In just the last few weeks, the Philippines, Taiwan
and Vietnam have all raised the threat of military action over the potentially
oil-rich Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, after China built a
military-style platform atop a tiny reef. Asian diplomats have been alarmed by
the recent dispute between two old strategic allies, the Philippines and
Singapore, which came close to a diplomatic split over the execution in
Singapore of a Filipino maid.

Tension

Worried, Japanese scholars and nuclear experts have proposed a pan-Asian
agreement to police recycling of nuclear material and prevent military
diversions. Diplomats in the region have embraced the idea.

Proponents say an accord may be essential as Asian nations are forced to
cooperate in waste disposal. Some land-starved countries are already having
trouble disposing of spent fuel -- South Korea expects to fill all its storage
sites in a decade.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map/Diagram: "The Asian Syndrome: Many More Reactors" locations of the
115 commercial and research reactors in Asia. (Sources: Nuclear Engineering
International, The Nuclear Energy Institute)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              105 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: THE GRIEVING;
Ordinary Lives of Victims, Remembered in Grief

BYLINE: By RICK BRAGG

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 4;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1504 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, April 22


They were there for the most mundane reasons. Sometime after 9 A.M., before the
first cup of coffee got cold, many of them were murdered.

The bomb that tore apart the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building murdered
3-year-old Zackary T. Chavez before he had time to build his daily castle from
building blocks in the day-care center. His body has been identified.

It swallowed up Rick Tomlin, 46, a civil servant, before he finished his labor
of love, restoring and painting a 1968 Plymouth Roadrunner. He is still missing,
and his wife's hopes fade a little more with each hour.

It buried 5-year-old Aaron Coverdale, before his two front teeth grew back in.
He, along with his little brother, Elijah, 2, are missing and feared dead.

And it killed Sgt. 1st Class Lola Rene Bolden, an Army recruiter and 40-year-old
single mother, two years before retirement. Her mother, still working as a cook
at 62, had hoped her daughter would have that luxury she never knew: some rest.

The people who filled the Federal office building in downtown Oklahoma City on
Wednesday morning were there to pay off loans at the credit union, to sign up
for Social Security, to put in eight solid hours for a paycheck that never
seemed quite enough. The very smallest of them, at a day-care center on the
second floor, were there to rhyme the ABC's and color outside the lines.

They were just living.

Today, as much of the world concentrated on why this happened, and who was to
blame, hope of finding anyone else alive in the hellish jumble of glass, steel
and concrete diminished further. As days have passed, and the stench of the
still-entombed rose, the finding of survivors went from likely to unlikely. By
this afternoon, the most that friends and relatives could hope for was a
miracle.

As the death toll climbed to 81, with as many as 150 still unaccounted for, four
families grieved at coffee tables, ate pound cake brought by sympathetic
neighbors and rehashed the lives of the people they loved. They were ordinary
lives, in a good way.

Eleven-year-old Jeffrey Coverdale 2d saw pictures of the mangled building on
television.

"Who's in there?" he asked his father. He was told that his cousins were among
those inside.

"That's not fair," he said.

Zackary Chavez: Just 3

He was born in a neighborhood where most dreams climb only one story high.

On the south side of Oklahoma City -- what people here call "the less
fashionable side" -- the streets are crowded with single-story, wood-frame
houses. The yards are small, but immaculate and lush. It is a working-class
neighborhood. People make the best of what they have.

On 101st Street, Zackary, a desperado with a water pistol, lived with his single
mother, surrounded by an army of aunts and uncles.

The Chavez Hernandez clan, third-generation Mexican-Americans, gave him all they
could afford. On March 23, his third birthday, his family threw the standard
neighborhood bash: a party at McDonald's. Zackary had McNuggets.

He took just two breaths to blow out the candles on his chocolate cake. He
practiced by blowing out matches lit by his uncle, said his aunt, Kathy Chavez
Hernandez.

His mother's birthday was coming up in May. For months, he had been practicing
to say: "Mommy, I love you. You are beautiful."

He was not always so angelic. He would ask his aunt for one piece of gum and
then grab the whole pack. He would offer women a kiss, but then would turn his
face so that they would kiss him instead.

His mother, Alisha Chavez Hernandez, 22, a customer-service representative at a
discount long-distance telephone company, left him at the day-care center in the
Federal building so she could work.

His aunt said he was prone to pick on other children and liked to butt heads
with his best friend.

The day of the bombing, Zackary almost did not go to day care. An uncle, who was
staying home from work with the flu, had offered to baby-sit. But his mother was
afraid that the little boy would catch the flu. They rode to the center in her
purple 1994 Chevrolet.

"My heart stopped when I saw what happened on TV," said Zackary's aunt, Ms.
Hernandez.

The family searched from hospital to hospital but could not find him. Finally,
on Thursday the family identified him through his red and white shirt with a
teddy bear on it.

While offers of free burial and plots have poured in from wealthier sections of
Oklahoma City, Max Chavez Hernandez, an uncle, said there had been no offers of
a grave site near the family's south side neighborhood.

"We want to bury him close to home," Mr. Chavez said.

Rick Tomlin: A 'Somebody'

His recent promotion in the Department of Transportation had brought a better
office, one with a view from the fourth floor.

"I've got a window," Mr. Tomlin had joked to his wife, Tina. "I must be
somebody."

Now the fourth floor is fused with others, in what rescue workers call a
pancake. The civil servant has been missing for four days.

Mrs. Tomlin waits for word. The neighbors along Arrowhead Road bring food and
kind words to their middle-class home in the suburbs, and she makes small talk
through her pain.

"So you live on the corner?" she asked a neighbor she had never seen. "Thank you
so much for coming by."

Mrs. Tomlin, 42, knows now that any chance her husband survived weakens every
hour. But they have been married 25 years and have raised two sons, now grown.

"Why did he have to die?" she asked, then, "No, no, I didn't mean to say that."

Her husband had served in Vietnam and left violence behind forever. At least
that is what he had hoped, Mrs. Tomlin said. His favorite song was John Lennon's
"Imagine."

"He didn't like war," she said. "He didn't like killing." He was not political.
He worked on cars in his spare time.

He had two 1968 Roadrunners and a '68 Chrysler, black with a white vinyl top. He
had been working hard to restore one of the Roadrunners.

"He had been bragging, saying it was ready to paint," Mrs. Tomlin said.

It would have been the sharpest car on Arrowhead Road.

The Coverdales: 'Her Hearts'

They lived with their grandmother. She always dressed them nice.

"They were her hearts," said their father, Keith Coverdale, a truck driver who
is often on the road.

He carried a picture, taken just a week ago, of two shiny-faced boys standing
tall in their new Easter suits, and showed it to anyone, everyone.

His sons are still believed to lie buried in the remains of the Federal
building, where they went for day care.

The grandmother, father and other relatives have been gathering at First
Christian Church, waiting for news. But already, relatives talked of the boys in
the past tense.

"They were a joy to be with," said their uncle, Jeff Coverdale. "They were
little chatterboxes. They were kids. They were boys."

Aaron Coverdale took care of his little brother. Each day at the day-care
center, they played together, and 5-year-old Aaron tried to coax 2-year-old
Elijah to follow rules, even take a nap when he was told.

The boys lived with their grandmother, Jannie Coverdale, less than a block from
the building. She works seven days a week and was thankful for the convenient
day care.

Aaron was an obedient child, his father said, usually content to watch
television when he was home. Elijah, on the other hand, was "a little monster,"
he said. "Elijah was into everything that we told him not to get into."

The only time he was quiet was when he curled up in his big brother's lap to
watch television.

"I had already installed in Aaron's mind to look out for Elijah, to set a good
example, to protect him," their father said. "They were together in life and if
they are in fact gone, they're together now."

Mr. Coverdale said he has considered what kind of funeral arrangements he would
make. "That they should be buried together, in the same coffin."

Lola Bolden: Homecoming

Mary Bolden's daughter is coming home to Birmingham, Ala.

Mrs. Bolden works the third shift in the kitchen at the county nursing home,
near Birmingham. She was home when the call came that her daughter was in the
Oklahoma City Federal building when it was bombed.

"I was getting ready to watch my soap operas," she said in a telephone
interview.

Her daughter, Sergeant Bolden, had never been in love with Alabama. Born in the
small town of Dixiana, she joined the Army because it was a better job than
flipping burgers at the Krystal in Jefferson County. She made it a career, and
it took her out of Alabama and around the nation.

"She couldn't find a job when she came out of high school," Mrs. Bolden said.
"There wasn't much."

Sergeant Bolden, who was divorced, had planned to retire and move to Colorado
with her two sons, 13 and 11, Mrs. Bolden said. Now, after Wednesday's blast,
her daughter is coming home to her.

Mrs. Bolden understands a lot of hard things in life, but this puzzles her.

"I wonder why," Mrs. Bolden said. "She was only trying to make an honest living.
Then all of a sudden her life is over.

"I wonder why."

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Wreaths in memory of the victims of the bombing surround the
police lines outside the blast site. (Monica Almeida/The New York Times); Aaron
Coverdale, 5, left, and his brother, Elijah, 2, who attended the day-care center
in the Federal building, are missing and feared dead. Zackary T. Chavez, who
also attended the day-care center, died in the bombing. In March, he celebrated
his third birthday with relatives. Rick Tomlin, 46, worked for the Department of
Transportation on the fourth floor of the Federal building. He is still missing.
(pg. 35)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              106 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 650 words



International 3-16

DNA TESTS IN WALES

Police in Cardiff, Wales, have encountered little opposition as they conduct
widespread DNA testing in their investigation of the rape and murder of a
15-year-old girl.  3

REREADING U.N.'S HISTORY

American officials read coded messages sent by the Allies at the end of World
War II, helping the United States dominate the conference that shaped the United
Nations. 4

DEATHS AT RWANDA CAMP

Dozens were killed and hundreds wounded when Rwandan Government forces opened
fire on a makeshift camp in Rwanda where ethnic Hutu had been moved. 9

FRENCH TRIAL UNSETTLES GABON

With its assertions about the President of Gabon, a prostitution trial in Paris
has upset the traditionally close relations between France and its former
colony. 10

VIETNAM'S ANNIVERSARY STRUGGLE

The Vietnamese soldiers who won the Vietnam War cannot make up their minds about
how to observe the 20th anniversary of the Communist victory. 12

A THREAT FROM NORTH KOREA

North Korea said that it would take a "necessary decisive measure" following the
breakdown of nuclear talks with the United States. 12

DISPUTE OVER BIODIVERSITY PACT

India said it may seek to block American access to medicinal plants and other
biological material from the third world. 13

Talks under way between Mexican Government and rebels. 14

A Canadian judge's ruling on artistic freedom. 14

South Africa's role in talks on renewal of nuclear treaty. 16

National 18-36

NATIONWIDE MANHUNT CONTINUES

From Michigan to Arizona, the authorities searched for a second suspect and
clues linking right-wing paramilitary groups to the bombing in Oklahoma City.  1


VICTIMS: ORDINARY PEOPLE

The bomb that tore apart the Federal building claimed people who were leading
ordinary lives.  1

THE SUSPECT AND HIS PAST

Timothy J. McVeigh, who has been arrested in connection with the bombing, is
recalled as "the quiet one" by a former teacher, who added that "the quiet ones
are the ones who have ended up doing scary things." 1

CLINTON COMFORTS THE CHILDREN

In a live broadcast, Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton urged the nation's children
to overcome their fears regarding the bombing.  35

A look at the defining agenda that ties right-wing militia groups.  33

THE UNRAVELING OF MARRIAGE

As gay men and lesbians flee difficult marriages, the impact on their nongay
spouses and children is just beginning to be examined.  1

TURNABOUT ON HEALTH DEBATE

A year after contending that the Administration's health plan amounted to social
engineering, Republicans now face similar charges.  1

RACING AGAINST THEMSELVES

San Francisco's mayoral race is turning into an electoral donnybrook with at
least five candidates. And they're all Democrats.  18

RE-INVENTING ENVIRONMENTALISM

As Earth Day turns 25, environmentalists are turning more and more to
grass-roots efforts to achieve their goals.  24

Metropolitan 37-45, 56

BRUTALITY CASES DELAYED

The board that handles police brutality complaints in New York City has fallen
so far behind in its work that a substantial number of cases may never be
reviewed in time to punish any officers who are found at fault.  37

STALKING ON BROADWAY

Stalkers are a frightening dark side to the Broadway stage. Theater actors are
probably the most vulnerable celebrities. Anyone with a ticket can be within 20
feet of them for two hours. And they leave by the same door on a grungy midtown
street at 11 every night.  37

ACCESSIBLE AUCTIONS

Venerable auction houses like Christie's and Sotheby's have become rarefied
versions of Loehmann's: the ultimate places to find or try to find a deal.  37

Obituaries 47

Maggie Kuhn, founder of the Gray Panthers.

Porter Hardy Jr., a former Virginia Congressman.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              107 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In School Bus Dispute, Focus Shifts From the Drivers to the Companies

BYLINE: By RICHARD PEREZ-PENA

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 39;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words


In pressuring for savings in the $316 million the city spends each year on
school bus service, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and his aides had harsh words for
bus company owners, most of whom have been able to renew their contracts with
the Board of Education without fear of competition since 1979.

The Mayor described the bus companies as profiteers, combining brinkmanship with
the threat of competition, as he did in showdowns last year with Legal Aid
lawyers and school custodians. His chief labor official, Randy L. Levine,
accused the operators of "sucking the blood out of the Board of Education."

But company owners protest that theirs is not a lucrative business.  They
contend that the same system that has guaranteed them continued work has also
guaranteed shrinking profits. Yet they also warn that the more open competition
proposed by the Mayor may force some companies out of business and leave workers
unemployed, while paradoxically failing to save the city money.

The Mayor, who had earlier focused his attacks on the bus workers' unions,
calling for an end to lifetime job security for drivers, toned down his attacks
last week, after bus drivers agreed to call off a strike planned for tomorrow,
when the spring recess ends.

Labor negotiations are continuing over the weekend, and while the Mayor appears
to have softened his stance against the job security provision, he seems intent
on bringing competitive bidding to the busing operation.

Several company owners say that their profit margins are thin, and that the city
could lose more than it gains unless there are significant wage concessions by
the union. Their arguments have largely been supported by Board of Education
officials and by a report by KPMG Peat Marwick, consultants hired by the board
to look for savings in the busing operation.

"I think the profits being earned are fairly slim," said Barry F. Sullivan, the
board's chief operations officer and a former banker. "We can't be sure how much
of a savings we'll get, but we've got to try everything to save money in this
climate."

Several company owners, as well as Peat Marwick, point to the experience of
Varsity Transit, which once held 80 percent of the city school bus contracts, to
illustrate the problems with competitive bidding.

In 1979, to save money, city and school officials decided to divide Varsity's
routes into more than 100 separate contracts and ask for competitive bids. Bus
drivers, escorts and mechanics struck because they stood to lose jobs. After
three months of disruption, the city settled by agreeing to require that
companies taking over routes hire existing workers without pay cuts.

This effectively precluded cheaper competitors from emerging, so except for a
few times since then, the Board of Education has given companies three-year
extensions, rather than seek bids.

Though it lost much of its business in 1979, Varsity remained the largest bus
company, with more than 600 routes. But in 1986, it refused to renew 453
contracts, which were put to competitive bidding.

"We gave them up because we were losing money," Burton Cooper, Varsity's
president, said in an interview last week.

Annual increases in the amount the Board of Education paid the bus companies
were limited to the consumer price index, the increase in the carrier's labor
costs, or a fixed figure of 4 to 7 percent, whichever of the three was least.

With those controls, Mr. Cooper said, "It's better to take your chances with
competition and maybe not get the business than to be guaranteed a slow but
steady disaster."

Varsity bid on its former contracts, but lost most of them. The Board of
Education ended up paying 12 percent more, or $17 million over five years, than
it would have under a contract extension. "They paid a high price for
competition," Mr. Cooper said.

The city's formula for payments to bus companies squeezes owners, said Dominic
F. Gatto Jr., president of Atlantic Express, the city's largest school-bus
franchise holder with about $60 million a year in city business.

"If the labor costs go up faster than the cost of living, we get the cost of
living and our profits drop," he said. "If the cost of living goes up faster
than our labor costs, we get our labor costs and again, our profits drop. It's a
formula for falling farther behind every year."

Mr. Gatto said his company's yearly profits were 3 to 4 percent, or between $1.8
million and $2.4 million.  "If we have to compete, we'll compete," he said. "But
at the end of the day, I don't think they can save any money."

Peat Marwick concluded that even if contracts are put out to bid and job
security provisions are eliminated, "there is the strong potential that prices
will ultimately be as high or substantially higher than current prices."

Most of the bus companies are privately held and family owned, and most started
small, when Varsity controlled all but the margins of the market. Mr. Gatto, a
disabled Vietnam veteran, said he took a job as a driver for a small, 21-van
fleet in 1972 because he needed work that would allow him to stay off his feet.

Two years later, he bought the company with borrowed money. Over two decades,
through bidding on contracts as they became available and buying small
competitors, he built a 750-route company, with two subsidiaries, Staten Island
Bus Company and Amboy Bus Company.

Mr. Gatto's operation resembles others in New York in that it encompasses
subsidiaries. While the Board of Education lists 78 separate companies with
busing contracts, the market is still concentrated among a handful of firms.
When companies with overlapping or identical ownership and shared garages and
offices are considered as one, there are actually fewer than 40 separate
concerns.

Eight companies or groups of related companies, including Atlantic, dominate the
market, with 73.5 percent of the 3,805 routes and well over $200 million a year
in city business.

In 1989 and 1990, law enforcement officials said that several of the bus
companies had ties to organized crime. Board of Education officials say that as
a result, 10 companies and several individuals were banned from the business,
and law enforcement officials say that mob influence has declined.

The contracts at issue in the current negotiations, expiring June 30, are for
620 routes but are held by five of the eight major companies.  Any concessions
they make are expected to set the pattern for the future.

The companies have two large incentives to try to retain their city business.
One is the capital they have invested, mostly in buses, maintenance equipment
and garages. Some of the companies have borrowed heavily for this; Mr. Gatto
said his debt totaled a relatively heavy $51 million, with annual revenues that
total, for all operations, about $100 million.

Moreover, the owners face stiff immediate liabilities for pension plans if they
lose their contracts. Under state law, bus companies are permitted to set aside
only a fraction of the pension benefits earned by their employees, but a company
that loses its contracts becomes immediately liable for the entire amount. For
larger companies, that figure would be several million dollars.

Because of these factors, owners warn, many carriers would be bankrupted by a
significant loss of business.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              108 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Maggie Kuhn, 89, the Founder Of the Gray Panthers, Is Dead

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 47;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 776 words


Maggie Kuhn, who called herself a little old woman and celebrated her forced
retirement in 1970 by founding the Gray Panthers, died yesterday at the home she
shared in Philadelphia with a like-minded coterie. She was 89.

"She died peacefully in her sleep," said her personal assistant, Sue Leary, who
could not say which of Miss Kuhn's many ailments, from arthritis to
osteoporosis, had caused her death.

For all Miss Kuhn's ailments, none had slowed her down. She spent the last 25
years leading people young and old in the fight against age discrimination and
other forms of what she saw as social injustice and stereotypical thinking and
just two weeks ago she had joined striking transit workers on their picket line.

Even so, there was some evidence that Miss Kuhn knew that the end was coming.
Although she had made it her goal to live until her 90th birthday, in August,
she had allowed her friends and admirers to celebrate it on April 1. And in a
recent issue of the Gray Panthers' publication, The Network, she had lectured
the organization's 40,000 members in 32 states on the need to prepare for the
21st century.

It was hardly the first time Miss Kuhn had been ahead of her time.

It was in 1970 that Miss Kuhn, who had worked 25 years for the United
Presbyterian Church in New York, commuting daily from her home in Philadelphia,
reached the mandatory retirement age of 65 and was forced to leave her job.

"They gave me a sewing machine," she once recalled, "but I never opened it. I
was too busy."

Within months of her retirement, she joined several friends in founding an
organization quickly dubbed the Gray Panthers, a name derived from the radical
Black Panthers.

Despite the name and the initial emphasis on championing the elderly, as
conceived by Miss Kuhn the organization knew no age boundaries. Its credo
described it simply as an advocate for "fundamental social change that would
eliminate injustice, discrimination and oppression in our present society."

For example, in addition to seeking a ban on mandatory retirement, which was
eventually enacted into law, the group called for "publicly owned and
democratically controlled" utilities.

No one who knew Miss Kuhn was surprised that in last year's health care debate
her organization championed what was widely seen as the most radical of the
various proposals: health insurance paid totally by the government, a position
that had been on the Gray Panthers' official agenda since 1977.

A tiny woman who wore her hair in a prim bun that gave her the look of an ideal
candidate to be helped across the street by a Boy Scout, Miss Kuhn, who detested
the term "senior citizen," made no apologies for her looks or her age.

"I'm an old woman," she told The New York Times in 1972. "I have gray hair, many
wrinkles and arthritis in both hands. And I celebrate my freedom from
bureaucratic restraints that once held me."

Miss Kuhn, whose opposition to the war in Vietnam made her a hero to many young
protesters, had a disarming argument in recruiting younger people to her cause:
"Everyone of us is growing old."

Known as an inspirational speaker, Miss Kuhn was just as persuasive in private
conversation, combining honey with the hammer.

"Forceful, yet gracious" is the way Miss Leary put it yesterday.

Miss Kuhn was a champion of social causes long before the Gray Panthers.

As she noted in her 1991 autobiography, "No Stone Unturned," (Ballantine) she
was conceived in Memphis, where her father, a traveling district manage for Dunn
& Bradstreet, was working at the time. But her mother, refusing to deliver a
child into a racist society, insisted on returning to her home in Buffalo to
give birth.

As a student at Flora Stone Mather College of Case Western Reserve University in
Cleveland, Miss Kuhn helped organize a college chapter of the League of Women
Voters.

And in a succession of jobs as a manager of social programs for the Young
Women's Christian Association in Cleveland, Philadelphia and Boston and in
similar work with the Presbyterian Church in New York, Miss Kuhn took what were
then unconventional positions on issues like peace and social justice.

Miss Kuhn, who could also be somewhat unconventional in her private life,
attributed the fact that she had never married to "sheer luck."

According to her book, she had many love affairs, including one in her 70's with
a student in his 20's. Miss Kuhn did not identify him, but Christina Long, who
helped her with the book, said the man, now in his 40's, was at the recent
birthday gala. "He seemed very proud of the romance," she said.

Miss Kuhn leaves no immediate survivors.

NAME: Maggie Kuhn

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maggie Kuhn (The New York Times, 1972)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              109 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BASEBALL;
Yankee Fans United: Baseball, Art and Soul

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 8;   Page 13;   Column 1;   Sports Desk

LENGTH: 757 words


Forty years ago, little Jane looked up at Grandpa Max and, with all the
seriousness of a Zen student, asked: "What's the difference between a line out
and a fly out?"

The old man turned down the televised Yankee game and, with all the seriousness
of a Zen master, answered the question.

Is it any wonder now that Jane Heller of Stuart, Fla., is jittery with
anticipation of the new season and concerned because too few Yankee games will
be beamed that far south? Baseball has always been in her life, she says, and
the Yankees have "always symbolized excellence," even when they weren't
excellent.

Forty-five years ago, little Roger began pounding his fists on the floor and
crying because the Yankees had just lost. His mother rushed in, and when she
found out the cause for his grief, she began shouting, "Are you out of your
mind?"

He was not yet able to explain that he had come to identify with the team's
"aura of excellence." A defeat was somehow a diminishing of his own
possibilities.

So Roger Sims of Everett, Wash., also waits for the new season. He will attend
Seattle Mariner games when the Yankees come to town. He admires Jimmy Key's
finesse. He will feel "tight, in turmoil" until a game is won or lost, but,
afterward, not feel particularly better or worse; more important to him is the
feeling that "there is always tomorrow because baseball is forever."

Baseball still holds many Americans in a kind of emotional ransom, despite the
recent attempts of the owners and players to de-romanticize the game and of
filmmakers like Ken Burns to sugar the diamond to a commercialized taste. How
else explain Sims and Heller, similar only in their sophistication, both Yankee
fans, both cheering without apology from the melting pot at the end of the
rainbow?

How much of the pull of baseball has to do with the game itself, how much with
the benchmarks in time it gives us, as has popular music through the century,
and, more recently, TV sitcoms?

"Good question, maybe a little over-intellectualized this time of year," said
Heller, who had just returned with her husband, the Ranger fan, Godie Forester,
from a Fort Lauderdale exhibition game against the Mets. "I love the actual
game. The orderliness of it. Someone hits you with a ball, you get a base. Bobby
Bonilla's swing is so pretty; I don't find that art in other sports. Other
people do, I guess.

"I love going to games, but I get overstimulated, trying to look into the
dugout, who's talking to whom, watching the ballplayers checking out the babes
in the stands, just like they did when I was in high school and I was one of the
babes in the stands."

In Sims's favorite games, the Yankees jump early to a 10-run lead and hold it.
Without the tension of worrying over losing, he can "enjoy the scenario,
appreciate the game itself, the continuing excellence."

"You know, black people are supposed to root for the underdogs," he said.
"Doesn't it make more sense to root for someone, something, that's going to be
on top? I began rooting for the Yankees in 1949, just as they started that long
run of being champions. I wanted to be a champion, too.

"Later on, the players I liked were Thurman Munson, Willie Randolph and Chris
Chambliss, a big quiet guy like me. Always hated Steinbrenner; he disturbed the
rhythms of the game. And his insistence on proving they were his Yankees. They
were my Yankees."

Heller said: "My father died when I was 6, and there were new houses and new
schools and new brothers and sisters, but baseball was always there. Moose and
John Blanchard and Yogi and Joe Pep were the perfect family you never fought
with. They were my heroes when I was small and in high school I wanted to marry
them."

The only period in her life when Heller lost track of baseball was during the
anti-war protests of the late 60's and early 70's. She says she was, "busy,
distracted, I just didn't care."

At this same period, Sims cared, but was also too busy; he was an Air Force
pilot in Vietnam. The fabric of his fandom was torn by the war.

"When I went in, I thought of myself on a championship team," he said. "I was
committed to the military. To its excellence. Sure, the Yankees analogy was
there. But then we were changed by the owners, the Steinbrenners, from leaders,
from warriors, to managers of violence. And we lost. I got out of the military.
I have also never expended my emotional coin on the Yankees in quite the same
way.

"Of course, when you grow up, you find that there's too much else that's more
important."

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yankee fans, young and old, have soaring hopes for the 1995
season. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              110 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

20 Years After Victory, Vietnamese Communists Ponder How to Celebrate

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 12;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 22


The Vietnamese Government has come up with a name for the momentous anniversary
that this country will mark next Sunday. It has been formally declared "The 20th
Anniversary of the Complete Victory in the War-Resistance Against U.S.
Aggression for National Salvation."

But the name is about all that has been decided.

Although this Government's single-minded dedication once drove off a superpower,
the soldiers who won the war cannot make up their minds about how to observe the
anniversary of the Communist victory that unified this country.

There is still no final schedule of the events for next Sunday in Ho Chi Minh
City, where the victory was sealed on April 30, 1975, when a North Vietnamese
tank crashed through the gates of the Presidential Palace in the city then known
as Saigon, only hours after the last evacuation helicopter lifted off the roof
of the United States Embassy.

Earlier plans for a military parade through the city appear to have been
scrapped. The guest lists have not been drawn up. It is not clear whether any of
the nation's senior leaders will even show up in Ho Chi Minh City next week.

"There are many important anniversaries this year, and there is so much work for
our leaders." said Tran Hoan, Minister of Culture and Information and a member
of the organizing committee for the anniversary. "Exactly who will take part
will be announced later."

For the Vietnamese, indecision does not equal indifference. Foreign diplomats
and Vietnamese officials say that the Government appears to be playing down the
significance of the anniversary out of fear that a large, boisterous celebration
might offend the United States at a time when Vietnam is eager for normal
relations with Washington. It was only last year that the United States lifted a
trade embargo that had crippled the Vietnamese economy.

"And it's much more than that," said a senior Western diplomat in Hanoi. "I
think the Vietnamese are worried that if they make a huge spectacle out of this
anniversary, it will only serve to make the world continue to think of Vietnam
only in terms of that horrible war. Who can blame Vietnam for wanting to be seen
as a country, not a war?"

Apart from the question of how the anniversary is portrayed in the outside
world, many Vietnamese are themselves torn about how to commemorate the end of a
war that according to a newly publicized survey by the Government, took the
lives of 1.1 million Communist soldiers and two million Vietnamese civilians.
(The Government says it has no way of estimating the number of dead from the
former South Vietnamese Army.) Should it be a celebration?

"When I hear the firecrackers explode on the anniversary, I will feel happy
about our victory, the victory of Uncle Ho Chi Minh and the Vietnamese Communist
Party," said Nghiem Xuan Tue, deputy director of the Ministry of Labor, War
Invalids and Social Affairs. "But also on this day we will light the incense for
the dead, and we will feel so very sorry for all of our dead comrades."

Mr. Tue, a retired army captain who fought for the Communists in the jungles of
South Vietnam in the 1970's, oversaw the final tallying of the dead from the
war, a project that required him daily to ponder the human devastation of the
war. And he insists it was not just the Vietnamese dead that he mourned.

"I have been to Washington D.C. four times and have seen the black-marble
monument," said Mr. Tue, who acts as a Government liaison to groups of American
veterans.

"In the numbers, your losses are not as large as ours. But I know that your
anguish is not small. It is like in Vietnam. When a soldier dies, he leaves
behind family and friends who mourn. The situation is the same for the Americans
as for the Vietnamese."

If Vietnam's leaders are trying to discourage publicity about the anniversary,
they will have little cooperation from the army of foreign reporters who have
descended on Vietnam to cover the event, many of them silver-haired American war
correspondents returning to Vietnam for the first time since the war.

Meeting last week with scores of reporters in Hanoi, Mr. Hoan, the Culture
Minister, quickly reminded his guests that the anniversary of the end of the war
was one of only several notable anniversaries this year -- and not even, he
insisted, the most important.

"There are many great anniversaries in 1995," he said, offering an extended
list: the 105th anniversary of the birth of Ho Chi Minh, the 125th anniversary
of the birth of Lenin, the 65th anniversary of both the Vietnamese Women's Union
and the Vietnamese Farmers Association.

The most important anniversary of the year, he said, will take place on Nov. 2,
National Day, when the country will mark the 50th anniversary of the founding of
the government of Ho Chi Minh.

"We'll pay special attention to all the anniversaries," Mr. Hoan explained. "But
much more attention will be paid to National Day."

The anniversary next Sunday, he said, will be carried out "in a spirit of thrift
and economy."

And many of the decisions about the celebration, he suggested, had yet to be
made, including a decision whether to invite American diplomats to the events in
Ho Chi Minh City. In February, the United States opened a diplomatic mission in
Hanoi, the Americans' first formal diplomatic presence in Vietnam since the war.

Asked whether it might be awkward for Vietnam to invite American diplomats to an
event that recalled the final humiliation of the United States here, Mr. Hoan
said, "This celebration would do good for the relationship because it would help
the American people to understand the situation of Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The 20th anniversary of North Vietnam's victory over the United
States is one week away, but the Vietnamese leadership has yet to decide on how
to mark the occasion in Ho Chi Minh City. A schoolgirl placed incense at the
tombs of some of those who were killed in the war. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              111 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;   Page 16;   Column 5;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 131 words


To the Editor:

Jude Wanniski states (letter, April 14) of the Vietnam War that The Times
"supported the war effort in its early stages." By February 1965 -- surely the
"early stages" -- The Times had already become highly critical of the escalating
war effort. From a Feb. 9, 1965, editorial (soon followed by many others in the
same vein): "The only sane way out is diplomatic . . . not military. A solution
will not be found by exchanging harder and harder blows. Surrender is out of the
question and 'victory' for either side is impossible." Thirty years later,
Robert S. McNamara confirms that view was the correct one, even at such an early
stage of the war.

JOHN B. OAKES
New York, April 21, 1995

The writer was editor of the editorial page of The Times, 1961-76.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              112 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Jennings Takes On U.N. Over Abuses in Bosnia

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;   Page 16;   Column 5;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 544 words


In his third and strongest hourlong report from Bosnia, Peter Jennings takes aim
at Lieut. Gen. Sir Michael Rose, the former commander of the United Nations
forces in that battered land. The specific charge of "The Peacekeepers: How the
United Nations Failed in Bosnia" is that having declared the towns of Gorazde
and Bihac to be safe havens, the United Nations, represented in the field by
General Rose, allowed the Serbian aggressors to get away with murder.

General Rose, in the critical view of relief workers and military officers,
played down the Serbian attacks and responded feebly or not at all despite his
ability to direct NATO air power against the aggressors. General Rose's
explanation, under the tough questioning of Mr. Jennings, that the United
Nations and NATO are on a peacekeeping mission not a war mission, seems weak and
evasive, especially when his words are accompanied by scenes of besieged
civilians under incessant attack.

Don't look to "The Peacekeepers" for evenhanded analysis. It is as one-sided as
the war against the Bosnians. It's in the worthy tradition of the journalistic
expose, on a far more serious level than the usual television news magazine
offering.

The program is devastating when it details repeated instances of General Rose's
failure to react to Serbian provocations, even when they took the form of
shelling a hospital or killing United Nations soldiers. But it also gets into
more complicated matters as it explains how the United Nations' relief efforts,
which have given food and medicine to tens of thousands of people, have turned
the relief workers into hostages to the Serbians.

Mr. Jennings takes us up to the water's edge of American policy, but barely
wades in. He uses Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, to express
American outrage and demand that something be done. But Lord Owen, who has been
much criticized for his unsuccessful attempts to find peace in Bosnia as a
negotiator for the European Community, reminds us that the United States can
talk tough because it has no troops at risk on the ground there. Tonight even he
seems resigned to a United Nations withdrawal.

Is Mr. Jennings suggesting, with the 20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon only
days away, that American troops be sent into a new killing field? No. He
concludes with an editorial that writes off the whole idea of a United Nations
Protection Force as hypocritical: "At the U.N., resolutions were passed to make
those passing them feel good, not to save Bosnia." And speaking for the Bosnian
Muslims, he says, "They ask only to be allowed to arm themselves and fight it
out." But if his advice prevails, might he not find himself returning fairly
soon to even worse carnage, indignant that the world did not do more to stop it?

"The Peacekeepers" is welcome for its vivid depiction of a grim record and a
failed policy. But as many journalists before Mr. Jennings have learned, it is
much easier to map the road to past failure than to find the way to future
success.

PETER JENNINGS REPORTING
The Peacekeepers: How the United Nations Failed in Bosnia
ABC, tonight at 8
(Channel 7 in New York)

David Gelber, executive producer. An ABC News special. Peter Jennings,
correspondent.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Jennings, left, interviewing Lieut. Gen. Sir Michael Rose,
the former head of the United Nations force in Bosnia. (ABC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              113 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: THE SUSPECT;
Arizona Neighbors Recall a Man's Love of Weaponry and 'Poor Attitude'

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section B;   Page 9;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words

DATELINE: KINGMAN, Ariz., April 23


Timothy J. McVeigh liked to wear camouflage Army fatigue pants tucked into black
combat boots, drink beer, play acid-rock music real loud and drive fast. But
above all, he liked to shoot guns.

"Just about any free time, he'd be walking down there, or across the railroad
tracks and firing his guns," said Marilyn Hart, nodding at the landscape of
canyons and mesas around the Canyon West trailer park here that is one of the
last known addresses of the man arrested for bombing the Oklahoma City Federal
building. "He just plain didn't care.  Didn't matter the time of day or night,
he'd be out there shooting."

But Mr. McVeigh's love of weaponry hardly set him apart in this high-desert
corner of northwest Arizona, where carrying and shooting guns is a treasured
right, where residents use the local police shooting range like people in other
towns would a municipal golf course, and where restaurants and bars have signs
asking patrons to please not bring their weapons inside.

Nor was his apparent hatred of the Federal Government particularly unusual.
People here condemn the killing and bloodshed in Oklahoma City, and say the
perpetrators should be promptly strung up. But in nearly the next breath,
conversations turn to the "socialistic" practices of the Government, ranging
from taxing cigarettes and whiskey to not allowing people to shoot mountain
lions. They also rail about Attorney General Janet Reno and her "whole alphabet"
of law enforcement agencies, and what they see as the possibility that foreign
soldiers, who are being trained in secret locations, will soon be coming door to
door to confiscate citizens' beloved weapons.

"Arizona is still gun-on-the-hip territory, rugged individuals who don't like
the government in their business," said Mrs. Hart, an affable white-haired
woman. For Mr. McVeigh and other possible suspects, she added, "It's a good
place for those kind of people to hide."

Indeed, sporadic gunfire popped all but unnoticed from along the rocky ridges as
residents of the trailer park remembered Mr. McVeigh as a surly loner who spoke
little, lived with a pregnant girlfriend who spoke even less, and belligerently
rebuffed any attempts to make him turn down his music or clean up the piles of
beer cans around the yellow trailer he rented for five months until he was asked
to leave last June.

"Basically he just had a poor attitude, a chip on the shoulder kind of thing,"
said Bob Ragin, the owner of the trailer park. "He was very cocky. He looked
like he was ready to get in a fight pretty easy. I'll tell you, I was a little
afraid of him and I'm not afraid of too many people.

"You'd tell him there were beer cans all over the yard and he'd just mumble," he
continued. "When I went to talk to him, I'd tell somebody 'If you hear fighting
or windows breaking, call the police.' "

Mr. McVeigh brought in a big brown dog in defiance of the camp regulations and
left a wrecked car parked by his trailer, Mr. Ragin said, and even a nearly
totally deaf neighbor, Clyde Smith, complained about the music. Finally, said
Mr. Ragin, "he piled up so many violations, I asked him to leave."

"When he did, the trailer was a disaster," he said. "It was trashed."

Danny Bundy, who lived a few trailers down, agreed that Mr. McVeigh was a bad
neighbor and a troublesome person, but he said he was not bothered by his
propensity for strolling to the edge of the trailer park and opening up.

"Everybody here shoots," he said.  "If a guy wants to shoot his gun off, have at
it. That's one thing I want to say about this. The right to bear arms, I don't
ever want to see that abridged."

Although Mr. McVeigh was thrown out of the trailer park in June, he apparently
stayed in the area until at least November. Leland Hart, a local businessman,
remembered seeing him around Thanksgiving at a local swap meet "trying to sell
some tools and the usual kind of thing."

Squads of F.B.I. agents swooped down on Kingman on Friday night.  Shouting
"F.B.I., F.B.I., put your hands up," they raided two trailers on McVicar Street
in a new subdivision on the edge of Kingman. One of the trailers sported a
yellow flag with a coiled rattlesnake and the slogan "Don't tread on me,"
hearkening back to the American Revolution.

No arrests were made, although some occupants were questioned, neighbors said.

At the two trailers today, a man with a pistol strapped to his hip, a perfectly
legal and commonplace sight here, told reporters to go away.

The F.B.I. also questioned residents at the Canyon West trailer park and
co-workers of Mr. McVeigh in the series of jobs he held here.  They also looked
at a house a little way down the road from the park that was damaged by an
explosion about two months ago. The explosion appeared relatively small,
knocking off the vinyl siding of an enclosed screen porch, but leaving the
structure and a hot water tank undamaged.

Mohave County Sheriff Joe Cook said the explosion "wasn't really a big deal" and
that it probably was not related to the group who planted the massive truck bomb
in Oklahoma City.

Mr. McVeigh, who used a private mail drop called the Mail Room, on Stockton Hill
Road, had a spotty work record at several jobs here, marked mostly by silence
toward his co-workers and sudden terminations.

At State Security, where he worked as a private guard and for a time as a
weapons trainer, however, Fred Burkett, a colleague, was impressed by his
prowess with guns.

"Believe me, the one thing he did not need was firearms training," Mr. Burkett
said. "He was very good and we were impressed with his action.

"He was arrogant about it," he continued. "He had this kind of look of 'You
think you're good, watch this.' And I have to admit he was real good. We were
impressed with him as far as his handling of a weapon because usually we take
someone out for training and it's like the first time they have ever held a gun.
But he was very familiar with the gun."

Other than that, Mr. Burkett said, he seemed "pretty much normal."

"He had a very dry personality," he continued. "He was not very outgoing, not
talkative and not really that friendly. He wasn't a person that mingled. He was
a kind of by-yourself kind of person, a loner.

"The only thing he ever indicated was that he didn't care much for the United
States Government and how they ran things," Mr. Burkett said.  "He didn't care
much for authority and especially when it concerned the Government."

Mr. Burkett was also struck by the way Mr. McVeigh, an Army veteran, was
fascinated by military ways.

"He always wore military garb, like jungle clothes, like if you were in Vietnam,
" he said. "He always wore his hair short, just like when they caught him. I
didn't think it was that big of a deal at the time. I mean, I thought maybe he
was still in the Army or something."

"McVeigh liked the stringency of the Army," Mr. Burkett said. "He liked the
uniformity of everybody dressing the same and walking the same. But he did not
like taking orders from people who he did not think were his superiors. He did
not like the U.S. Army."

And it was this dislike of orders that ended the job about a year and a half
ago, shortly after he got into a fight with a lieutenant at the firm who
reprimanded him for watching television on duty. Mr. McVeigh, Mr. Burkett
remembered, "barked back." Mr. McVeigh worked for a few months, beginning in
February 1994, at the True Value hardware store here. Mike Boggio, who was then
the manager but has since moved away, recalled mainly that "he wore his fatigues
every day and was real quiet, kept to himself."

Mr. Boggio remembered that politically Mr. McVeigh was "pretty anti-everything."

Paul Shuffler, the store owner, who is partial to hiring veterans because he is
one himself, said Mr. McVeigh "was a young and clean looking person so I gave
him a job."

"If he was a radical around here, I would have noticed it pretty quick and I
would have fired him," added Mr. Shuffler. "Radicals don't last long around here
because they just make a mess of things."

At a Shell gas station and Food Mart this afternoon, Robert Hamlin was cleaning
his pistol-grip Mossberg shotgun by the counter, chatting with his friend,
Robert R. Mudgett.

"Liking guns isn't out of the ordinary," said Mr. Mudgett, who was wearing a
trucker cap and a "have a nice day" T-shirt showing a happy face with an axe in
its cranium. "In this area, there's nothing to do but shoot guns and drink
beer."

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bob Ragin, the owner of the Canyon West trailer park in Kingman,
Ariz., where Timothy J. McVeigh lived last year. "I was a little afraid of him
and I'm not afraid of too many people," Mr. Ragin said. (Jeff Topping for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              114 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: THE LEGISLATION;
Anti-Terrorism Bill Is Expected to Receive Little Opposition

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section B;   Page 6;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


President Clinton's promise today to seek legislation strengthening the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's tools to combat terrorism will probably face little
opposition in Congress.

Since the F.B.I. became an effective Federal anti-crime agency in the 1930's,
lawmakers have acceded swiftly to such requests at times of public anxiety and
anger about crime. But it is also during such periods that civil liberties
advocates worry that government may be too quick to seize the opportunity to
expand its powers.

Although Mr. Clinton did not specify what his new legislative proposal would
contain, White House officials said it would be aimed at making it easier for
for F.B.I. agents to gather information about people and groups suspected of
plotting terrorist acts. The officials said the legislation would, for example,
seek to lower the threshold necessary for F.B.I. agents to gather information
from banks and telephone companies.

Although the bureau is today widely admired and especially lauded for its work
in investigating the Oklahoma City bombing, it has a troubling history of
abusing its authority at various times.

"The bureau is capable of doing wondrous things when it is set loose and applies
itself to a problem," said Sanford J. Ungar, the author of a history of the the
bureau, "F.B.I.: A Look Behind the Walls" (1975, Atlantic-Little Brown). "But
unfortunately, it's also capable of some dangerous things when it gets carried
away."

The most notorious efforts of the bureau were the so-called Counter-Intelligence
Programs, known as Cointelpro, of the late 1960's and early 1970's in which J.
Edgar Hoover, the F.B.I.'s longtime director, turned the agency's resources
first against black political organizations and then against the New Left. Under
the program, the bureau not only infiltrated the groups on which they kept
extensive records, but also planted false information against the leaders to
discredit them.

It was modeled on the first Cointelpro program set up by Hoover in the 1930's,
which was aimed at shattering the Communist Party and other allied groups in the
country.

In 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson persuaded Hoover to use the same tactics
against the Ku Klux Klan. In a short time, according to some accounts, the
bureau had nearly one in five Klan members enrolled as informers.

As protests over the Vietnam War heated up, President Johnson and Hoover joined
together to find what they thought was a conspiracy behind the urban riots and
protests against the war.

The program ended abruptly in 1971 when someone broke into the F.B.I. office in
Media, Pa., and took numerous files disclosing the bureau's domestic security
program.

After Edward H. Levi was named Attorney General in 1975 by President Gerald R.
Ford, he put into place a series of strict guidelines for the F.B.I. to follow
when they wanted to wiretap, bug or infiltrate potential terrorists.

But in 1983, William French Smith, the Attorney General under President Ronald
Reagan acceded to an F.B.I. request to to loosen the regulations to give the
bureau more latitude in investigating "violence-prone groups" and combatting
terrorism. Under the Smith guidelines, the bureau needed only to show a
"reasonable indication" of a threat to domestic security to begin an
investigation. Mr. Smith said the new guidelines would preserve a balance
between civil liberties and security largely because the modern bureau had
demonstrated its professional competence and ability to adhere to the law.

Yet, later that year, the bureau undertook an investigation into a group known
as the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador.

When the files were disclosed in 1988, it was apparent that the bureau had
improperly if not illegally collected intelligence files on thousands of people.

Philip S. Gutis, a spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union, said his
organization feared that events like the Oklahoma bombing made people more
amenable to having their civil liberties eroded.

He said that while his group did not know the details of the President's
proposal, civil liberties lawyers had been bracing for a renewed effort by
Congress or the Administration to seek to curtail constitutional rights.

"The F.B.I. now has all the power it needs to investigate wrongdoing," he said.
"It doesn't need any additional power. It may need additional resources." He
added: "Our fundamental liberties are never more in danger than after incidents
such as what occurred last week, but we must guard against overreacting in such
times of tragedy."

The F.B.I. first came to national prominence in the 1930's, when there was a
national crime wave of bank robberies and car thefts. In response, the Congress
enacted six bills on one day in May 1932 to expand the bureau's powers, Mr.
Ungar said.

A similar quick response is expected from Congress in the weeks ahead. In
addition to the new legislation he spoke of tonight, President Clinton also
urged Congress to pass quickly the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995. The
measure had been been the subject of strong debate over whether it curtailed
basic constitutional rights including the right to confront one's accuser.

The provision that has drawn the most opposition is one that would allow the
Government to deport aliens on the basis of secret evidence. The bill would
allow the Government to keep confidential sources and the exact nature of the
charges against someone accused of involvement with terrorism.

Scores of Federal lawmakers endorsed the measure on the day after the Oklahoma
explosion.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              115 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: AT A GLANCE;
Right-Wing Movements Around the Country

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER

SECTION: Section B;   Page 9;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


Here are the principal centers of political organizing and training for the
right-wing Patriot Movement, an umbrella movement for a loose confederation of
militant right-wing groups that believe the Federal Government is seeking to
control its citizens.

1. Harbor Springs, Mich.: Headquarters for the Michigan Militia Corps, a
paramilitary organization with "brigades" in 73 of the state's 83 counties. The
militia's leaders said on Saturday that James and Terry Nichols, who are in
custody, attended a brigade meeting in Sanilac County and were asked to leave
after urging militia members to tear up their driver's licenses and Social
Security cards, to stop paying their taxes and to take other steps to defy the
Government. The Michigan Militia claims 12,000 members but that cannot be
verified.

2. Dexter, Mich.: Home base for Mark Koernke, 37, a building maintenance worker
at the University of Michigan, and one of the nation's most militant militia
leaders. Koernke has an hourlong radio show, "The Intelligence Report,"
broadcast nationally five-nights a week on WWCR, a short-wave station in
Nashville that broadcasts neo-Nazi and white supremicist programs.

3. Adrian, Mich.: Base of the Proclaim Liberty Ministry, which operates a
telephone line for militia organizers and sells has more than 50 videotapes for
sale on militia activities and other written militia materials. Accepts only
gold or cash for payment.

4. Hillsboro, W.Va.: Headquarters of the National Alliance and home of William
Pierce, a white supremacist and author of "The Turner Diaries," a 1979 novel
that describes a white supremacy takeover of the United States, including the
fertilizer and fuel oil car bombing of the F.B.I. building in Washington.
Pierce's radio program, "American Dissident Voices," frequently includes
interviews with militia organizers and is heard on nine AM and three FM radio
stations in nine states, and on a short-wave radio station in New Orleans.

5. Indianapolis: Headquarters of Linda Thompson's American Justice Federation,
which markets aggressively anti-Government books, videotapes and radio programs.
Thompson, a former civil liberties lawyer, operates a public relations company
and has a program on AM and short-wave radio.

She almost single-handedly made the siege of the Branch Davidian compound in
Waco, Tex., a rallying cry for resistance against the Government. She produced
two documentaries in 1993, "Waco, the Big Lie," and "Waco, the Big Lie
Continues," that accused the Government of used flame throwers to start the fire
that destroyed the compound. She also called on militias to stage an armed march
on Washington on Sept. 19, 1994. It was canceled after militia leaders said it
was too radical.

6. Noxon, Mont.: Headquarters of the Militia of Montana, one of the largest such
groups. Founded by John Trochmann, 51, his brother, David, 48, and Randy
Trochmann, 27, a nephew. John and David Trochmann, who once operated a
snowmobile parts company in Minnesota, run a communications and sales operation
for militia videos, books and other materials. They train militia members from
other states and have helped hundreds of these groups get started.

7. Kamiah, Idaho: Base of James (Bo) Gritz, a former Green Beret commander in
Vietnam and founder of Almost Heaven a Christian Covenant Community, which holds
that white people are the masters of the earth and are preparing for possible
confrontation with the Government. Gritz's paramilitary training has been copied
by other militias. Gritz was instrumental in protests that followed the killing
of the wife and son of Randy Weaver, a white supremacist, during a Federal siege
of Weaver's Idaho home in 1992. He ran for President in 1992.

8. Blackfoot, Idaho: Base of the influential United States Militia Association
and its founder, Samuel Sherwood. Sherwood advocates that militias become
prepared for civil war and has trained militia leaders in eight states. His
public statements have been extreme. "Civil War could be coming and with it the
need to shoot Idaho legislators," he said at a militia meeting on March 2.

(Sources: The Coalition for Human Dignity, the Center for Democratic Renewal,
the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith, the Southern Poverty Law Center, The
Pennsylvania Human Rights Commission, Political Research Associates.)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              116 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

John C. Stennis, 93, Longtime Chairman of Powerful Committees in the Senate,
Dies

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section B;   Page 11;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1599 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


Senator John C. Stennis, a courtly Mississippi Democrat who served in the Senate
longer than all but one other person in history, died today at St.
Dominic-Jackson Memorial Hospital in Jackson, Miss. He was 93 years old.

Mr. Stennis died of complications of pneumonia, said Rex Buffington, director of
the John C. Stennis Center for Public Service at Mississippi State University in
Starkville.

When he retired on Jan. 3, 1989, Mr. Stennis had been in the Senate 41 years, 1
month and 29 days. Only Carl Hayden of Arizona, who retired in 1969 after 41
years and 10 months in the Senate, served longer.

Although he was president pro tempore of the Senate, a largely honorary position
given to the Senator in the majority party who has the most seniority, and was
chairman of the Appropriations Committee in the 100th Congress, his role in his
last years on Capitol Hill was largely that of patriarch and teacher to younger
senators.

He no longer dominated legislation as he had in the 1960's and 1970's, when he
was the most influential voice in Congress on military affairs and when, widely
respected for his integrity, diligence and judgment, he was called upon time and
again to investigate touchy political matters, particularly those that had
embarrassed the Senate. It became routine to refer to him as the conscience of
the entire institution.

In many respects, John Stennis was the last of the Senate's Southern barons --
Democrats elected from one-party states who gained power through seniority and
often wielded it autocratically to block the more liberal initiatives of the
senators from the rest of the country. His support for the military was
unswerving, and his advocacy of racial segregation was unalloyed for most of his
career.

But in style and temperament, Senator Stennis was cut from a mold different from
most of the other Southerners who came to power shortly after World War II. He
did not drink, smoke, swear in public or use racial epithets. Perhaps more
important, he changed with the times, began supporting some civil rights
measures, and, in his last elections, he ran well among black voters.

His colleagues from outside the South did not fear him so much as they liked and
admired him. At the height of one of the battles over civil rights legislation
that occupied the Senate in the 1960's, Senator Paul H. Douglas, Democrat of
Illinois, a leader of the faction supporting the measure, declared, "If I were
ever to have to go on trial, I would want John Stennis to be my judge."

It was his personal qualities that led Senator Stennis's colleagues to choose
him so often to head political inquiries. As early as 1954, when he was a junior
senator, he was named to the committee that investigated charges against Senator
Joseph R. McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin.

Eight years later, he was put in charge of an investigation of accusations that
the Pentagon was muzzling officers who wanted to speak up against Communism. In
1967, he headed the investigation of Senator Thomas J. Dodd, Democrat of
Connecticut, that led to Senator Dodd's censure for misuse of funds and to a new
code of ethics for the Senate.

In 1973, President Richard M. Nixon took advantage of Senator Stennis's
reputation for integrity and proposed that, instead of turning over the
Watergate tapes to the independent prosecutor, he allow the Senator to listen to
them and authenticate summaries prepared by the White House.

Mr. Stennis at first agreed. But when the prosecutor, Archibald Cox, objected to
the suggestion and was discharged for his defiance, the Stennis compromise
collapsed.

Mr. Stennis was chairman of the Armed Services Committee at the height of the
Vietnam War, and President Nixon relied on him to defend the Administration
against countless end-the-war amendments and efforts to cut the Pentagon's
budget. More often than not, Mr. Stennis was successful, despite opposition by
most of his fellow Democrats.

Later, when President Jimmy Carter rejected some of the Pentagon's spending
requests, Senator Stennis tried to accommodate him, although, personally, he
would have preferred a larger military budget.

Years later, the Senator said in an interview that he never tried to
second-guess a President on foreign policy and military matters.

"I lean with the President on our system of government," he declared, expressing
a view that many modern senators consider old-fashioned. "Makes no difference
who he is. I would back those fellows on a lot of things."

While he often counseled young senators and helped them through the
parliamentary maze that the Senate, over time, has constructed for itself, Mr.
Stennis in his later years seemed to long for the days when junior senators
bided their time and held their tongues.

"I'm not blaming them," he once said of his younger colleagues. "They come here
on the average well-educated. But they don't have the maturity, if I may use
that term. They don't have the experience in public affairs that the old-timer
had. It takes time to mature."

John Cornelius Stennis was born on Aug. 3, 1901, in Kemper County in the red
clay hills of eastern Mississippi. He was a member of one of the leading
families in the rural county. His father was a farmer, but the Stennises were
known as professional people -- doctors, lawyers, teachers and legislators.

John C. Stennis graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Mississippi State University in
1923 and, four years later, received his law degree at the University of
Virginia. A year out of law school, he was elected to the Mississippi
Legislature, and that was followed by elections as district prosecuting attorney
and circuit judge.

After 10 years on the bench, he ran in 1947 for the Senate seat vacated by the
death of the flamboyant Senator Theodore G. Bilbo and was elected that November
over five opponents. "I want to plow a straight furrow right down to the end of
my row," Mr. Stennis asserted in that campaign. The philosophy seems to have
guided the rest of his political career.

Until his last campaign, in 1982, he was never seriously challenged for
re-election, and even then, facing a 34-year-old Republican, Haley Barbour, who
made the Senator's advanced age a major issue, Mr. Stennis won by about 2 to 1.

In his early days in the Senate, he worked 16 hours a day, staying in the Senate
until it adjourned and then studying in the Library of Congress until it closed.
He was, as an aide described him, "a plodder, a guy who would go over something
once and then again and then again until he finally understood all the
complexities."

Asked once what his hobby was, Mr. Stennis said, "My work is my play and my play
is my work." That work often paid off in the currency of special projects for
his constituents. The Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway, a massive public works
project that opened in Mississippi in 1985, is his pyramid.

Few other senators had such a commanding presence as Mr. Stennis did in his
heyday. When he stood on the floor to speak, he would start by snapping his
fingers, making a sound that could be heard in every corner of the chamber, and
a page would come scurrying with a glass of water.

Then, his throat cleared, he would rise behind the lectern on his desk at the
rear of the chamber, and a hush would fall over the Senate. His speeches
resembled lectures. He would not tolerate interruptions, often pointing his
finger and making a "shush" sound when another senator tried to speak.

He paced up and down the center aisle as he talked, with such resonance that,
even after microphones were installed in the Senate, he often spoke without one.

His voice remained clear and his mind sharp as he grew older, but he had serious
physical problems. He was shot and seriously wounded by a burglar at his home in
1973, and his left leg was amputated in 1984 because of cancer. But each time,
he returned to his Senate work much sooner than expected.

But the injury and the illness took their toll. After he lost his leg, bars were
constructed on his desk in the Senate chamber so he could pull himself out of
his wheelchair and stand when he delivered one of his rare speeches on the
floor.

Mr. Stennis's friends said he suffered from extreme loneliness after his wife,
the former Coy Hines, whom he called "Miss Coy," died in 1983. They had been
married more than 50 years.

After his retirement, Mr. Stennis moved to the Mississippi State University
campus at Starkville, the home of the John C. Stennis Institute of Government
and the John C. Stennis Center for Public Service, created by Congress to train
young leaders Also named for him is NASA's National Space Technology Laboratory
near Bay St. Louis, Miss. The John C. Stennis Space Center tests rocket motors.
The nation's newest aircraft carrier was christened the John C. Stennis and is
scheduled to be commissioned next December.

"I do believe the most important thing I can do now is to help young people
understand the past and prepare for the future," Mr. Stennis said in a 1990
interview while serving as executive-in-residence at Mississippi State.

In declining health, Mr. Stennis lived in recent years in a nursing home in
Madison, near Jackson. He is survived by two children, Margaret Womble, of
Winston-Salem, N.C., and John H. Stennis, of Jackson, Miss.

Mr. Buffington said Mr. Stennis's body will lie in state at the Old Capitol in
Jackson on Tuesday from 10 A.M. to 1 P.M., and then at DeKalb Presbyterian
Church in DeKalb from 4 to 6 P.M. Graveside services are to be held at the
DeKalb Cemetery on Wednesday at 11 A.M.

NAME: John C. Stennis

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John C. Stennis (Associated Press, 1983)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              117 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 285 words


In 1970, JOHN FILO, a student at Kent State University, snapped a photograph of
an anguished MARY ANN VECCHIO kneeling over the body of one of four students
killed by the National Guard during demonstrations there. The photo won a
Pulitzer Prize for Mr. Filo and became the emblem of the anti-Vietnam War
movement, but the photographer and the subject never met until Sunday.

They were brought together at a conference at Emerson College in Boston
commemorating the 25th anniversary of the uprisings at Kent State University in
Kent, Ohio, and Jackson State University in Jackson, Miss., over the United
States bombing of Cambodia.

"It was finally time for us to meet," said Mary Ann Vecchio Gillum, who was a
14-year-old runaway from Miami at the time and who now uses her married name.
"It was my destiny that I go there, but I had no idea my picture was being
taken."

She said that after it appeared around the country, "I was terrified of the
police and the Government, so I went underground for several weeks." She agreed
to a newspaper interview in return for a bus ticket to California, but, she
said, "the police showed up, took me into custody and sent me home."

After that, "I couldn't function," she said. "I kind of rambled until I met my
husband, Joe Gillum." The couple moved to Las Vegas, Nev., where Mrs. Gillum,
39, is a cashier in the Sahara Hotel coffee shop.

Mr. Filo, 46, now the deputy picture editor at Newsweek magazine, said the
encounter brought a sense of relief and closure.

"I always worried about this person," he said. "I placed this child under a
microscope for a long, long time and caused her immense difficulty. I am so
happy that she is now happy."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: On May 4, 1970, Mary Ann Vecchio, then 14, became the subject of
a famous photograph after National Guardsmen killed four demonstrators at Kent
State University in Kent, Ohio. At a conference in Boston on Sunday, she finally
met the photographer, John Filo. (Photographs by The Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              118 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: LEGISLATION;
Clinton Plan Would Broaden F.B.I. Powers

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


Under a proposal being considered by the Clinton Administration, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation would be able to compile information on potentially
menacing organizations like right-wing paramilitary groups even when there is no
evidence they are involved in criminal activity, Government officials said
today.

Under current guidelines, the F.B.I. is forbidden from investigating such groups
unless there is a "reasonable indication" that they are trying to achieve their
goals through violence and explicit violations of the criminal laws. Following
the Oklahoma City bombing, law-enforcement officials have complained privately
that those guidelines hamper them from gathering the kind of information needed
to prevent such tragedies. Under the proposal being considered, the F.B.I. could
infiltrate such organizations or use informers to keep track of their
activities.

If the Administration goes ahead with its initiative, it will almost certainly
launch the country into one of its periodic debates about how to balance the
need for domestic security with civil-liberties considerations, including the
right of groups to express starkly unpopular ideas.

In Minneapolis today, President Clinton moved quickly to mobilize public anger
against some of those groups, calling for Americans to take a firm stand against
organizations "whose sole goal seems to be to try to keep some people as
paranoid as possible and the rest of us all torn up and upset with each other."

In a speech to the American Association of Community Colleges, the President
said, "To those of us who do not agree with the purveyors of hatred and
division, with the promoters of paranoia, I remind you that we have freedom of
speech, too, and we have responsibilities, too."

While Mr. Clinton spoke of the need to respond to offensive speech,
law-enforcement officials and the White House were looking at ways to modify
guidelines last revised in 1983 that specify when the F.B.I. may compile
information on groups that could be involved in terrorism.

Oliver B. Revell, a retired former senior F.B.I. official, said that the current
guidelines did not fit the modern world, in which explosives and even nuclear
weapons may become available to terrorists. He said the guidelines had been a
constant frustration to F.B.I. officials.

"The problem is that these rules require we have a criminal predicate before we
investigate," he said. "That means you have to wait until you have blood on the
street before the bureau can act. You can't prevent what you don't know about
and you can't know about a group if you can't investigate until after they have
committed an act of terrorism."

Joseph Di Genova, a former Federal prosecutor, said, "What we have going now is
a massive revisiting of the issue of how much authority do you give the bureau
to investigate and infiltrate organizations in a free society." Mr. DiGenova,
who helped draft the first set of guidelines in 1976 under Attorney General
Edward H. Levi, said at the time there was a consensus that there was a need to
set a high threshold for the F.B.I. to investigate a political group.

"The bureau wants to be very aggressive and pro-active in looking at these
organizations," Mr. Di Genova said. "But the President has to be very careful
here. Even if we had the most massively intrusive techniques, it's not certain
they would have known about this event."

The guidelines put in place under Mr. Levi were drafted in the years immediately
following disclosures about the F.B.I.'s notorious counterintelligence programs,
known as Cointelpro. Between 1968 and 1971, the bureau collected thousands of
files on black radical groups as well as people involved in opposition to the
Vietnam War, under the vague theory that they were involved in a broad
conspiracy to subvert the United States.

The F.B.I. not only infiltrated the groups on which they kept extensive records,
but also planted false information to discredit their leaders.

The F.B.I., sensitive to its history, is uncomfortable operating near the
boundary of the guidelines, said one Administration official who added that the
bureau had asked for rules flexible enough to keep it well away from arguably
improper behavior. For example, F.B.I. officials have been uneasy over the
Clinton Administration's order to look into the possible existence of a
conspiracy among anti-abortion groups.

Harold M. Ickes, the deputy chief of staff at the White House, said today that
President Clinton would be sensitive to any constitutional issues raised by
giving the F.B.I. more investigative authority. "This President is well familiar
with the Constitution," Mr. Ickes said. "He has taught constitutional law and he
is very concerned that whatever is submitted conform to the Constitution."

Mr. Clinton has already called for new authority for the F.B.I. to monitor the
telephone calls and check the credit, hotel and travel records of suspected
terrorists. In a series of opinions, the Supreme Court has ruled that such
matters do not violate the Constitution's prohibition against unreasonable
searches. The Court has ruled that once a person has disclosed information to
another party, like the telephone company, he has waived the right to keep that
information private from the Government.

Under the current guidelines, if the F.B.I. undertakes an investigation of a
group for domestic terrorism, it may use informants and people to infiltrate the
group. Wiretaps and information from devices used to record telephone numbers
called from a specific phone may only be used after obtaining the consent of a
Federal judge.


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              119 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Legislate in Haste

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 648 words


With the sorrow deep and the anger still raw from Oklahoma City, Americans share
President Clinton's fierce commitment to "purge ourselves of the dark forces
which gave rise to this evil." But in honoring that pledge in the coming days,
Mr. Clinton and Congress must not knock the nation loose from its constitutional
moorings. This time of national trauma is not the moment to rewrite American
law. The temptations will be too great to curtail liberty in the effort to
extinguish terrorism, and to give law enforcement agencies more intrusive powers
than they need or have ever shown the ability to manage without trampling on
citizens' rights.

The political response to the Oklahoma City bombing has already created
competition to see which party can produce more powers for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and other agencies responsible for combating terrorism. There is a
danger that the fervor of the moment will produce new laws or procedures
reversing two decades of progress in controlling an F.B.I. that has a weak
history of curbing its own excesses.

Mr. Clinton, without supplying details, has proposed an array of enhanced
surveillance powers to track the activities of potential terrorist groups by
making it easier for the Government to monitor phone and computer lines, review
bank, credit and travel records, recruit informants and infiltrate suspected
groups. He would establish an F.B.I. domestic counterterrorism center to
coordinate Federal efforts. He belittled the potential for misuse by comparing
these steps to the introduction of metal detectors at airports, which he called
"a minor infringement on our freedom."

Washington too quickly forgets the brazen violations of American freedoms
committed by the F.B.I., the Central Intelligence Agency and other security
services in their misguided efforts to control domestic political dissent in the
1960's and 1970's. With contempt for the Constitution, the F.B.I. used
surveillance and investigative powers to undermine the civil rights movement.
Exploiting precisely the kind of enforcement latitude Mr. Clinton would
re-establish, the F.B.I and C.I.A. illegally harassed Americans who opposed the
Vietnam War. The F.B.I. burglarized the offices of suspect groups, bugged Martin
Luther King Jr. and used infiltrators to provoke illegal activities. Even noble
goals, like the control of Ku Klux Klan violence, were tainted by needlessly
excessive tactics.

That spasm of misconduct led political leaders of both parties to set limits,
but they left investigators with plenty of weapons to detect and stop anyone who
seemed prepared to use force or violence in pursuit of a political goal. The
safeguards established then give the Government the means it needs to identify
and gather intelligence on potential terrorist groups today.

For law enforcement agencies, the core question is defining the threshold for
opening an investigation. The guidelines adopted 20 years ago under President
Ford, and modified under President Reagan, permit vigorous investigation "when
facts or circumstances reasonably indicate" that force or violence and a
criminal violation may be used to achieve political or social goals. By that
yardstick, Federal agents could investigate most of the armed paramilitary
groups that have drawn attention since the Oklahoma bombing.

Law enforcement agencies argue that the investigation of suspect groups should
not wait until there is reasonable indication they may break the law. Yet
without that standard, too many constitutionally protected activities would be
subject to Government surveillance and intimidation.

The Government has the power under existing law to crack terrorist groups. If
the F.B.I. and other agencies need more money or manpower, the White House and
Congress should provide it -- but not a license to interpret the Constitution as
they see fit.


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              120 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Why Anthony Lake Kept Silent in '70

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 168 words


To the Editor:

Anthony Lewis rightly excoriates Robert S. McNamara for not speaking out early
against the Vietnam War (column, April 17) but takes a step too far in
criticizing Anthony Lake for not making public his reasons for resigning from
Henry Kissinger's National Security Council in 1970.

Tony Lake, my brother-in-law, hoped that by not going public, his resignation in
protest against the Cambodian invasion might have some influence on Mr.
Kissinger. He knew that if he made a public fuss, it would be a one-day
front-page story, nothing gained. Within months, he became an adviser to Edmund
S. Muskie's Presidential campaign. When that failed, he did go public, writing
many articles against the war.

In 1970, a young Tony Lake believed that although the war compelled his
resignation, he might be of service later. Had he made a one-day public fuss,
that would have been impossible. Today he is national security adviser.

PETER S. PRESCOTT
New Canaan, Conn., April 17, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              121 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

PERSONAL COMPUTERS;
User-Friendliness: Book vs. Disk

BYLINE: By STEPHEN MANES

SECTION: Section C;  Page 8;  Column 4;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


"MATERIAL WORLD: A GLOBAL FAMILY PORTRAIT" (Sierra Club Books) is a fascinating
volume of photographs, essays and statistics about the way people live around
the globe. Conceived by the photographer Peter Menzel, the book portrays the
worldly goods and daily life of 30 representative families, along with
statistics and commentaries about the countries they inhabit.

"Material World" from Starpress Multimedia, phone (800) 782-7944, is also a
CD-ROM that, according to the book's jacket flap, "brings even greater life to
the subject with spectacular video, breathtaking photography, and stereo sound."
If these claims were true, books in general, and this book in particular, would
seem to be endangered species. A comparison between bound volume and CD-ROM
should help reveal whether reports of the death of the book are greatly
exaggerated.

The CD-ROM requires a 25 megahertz 386DX or faster I.B.M.-compatible computer
(486 is recommended), Microsoft Windows 3.1 or higher, DOS 5.0 or higher, four
megabytes of random access memory (eight is recommended), VGA/ SVGA or better
display quality with 640 by 480 dots and 256 colors, a mouse, a hard drive, a
CD-ROM drive with at least 150 kilobit/second transfer rate and a
Sound-Blaster-compatible, Sound Blaster Pro, or Roland sound card. (Macintosh
requirements differ.) The book requires only a source of light.

Installing the CD-ROM is an interactive process requiring minutes of pointing,
clicking, and waiting in front of a keyboard and computer screen. The book can
be installed instantaneously in one's hands or lap indoors or out.

On a 17-inch monitor, the CD-ROM can display 50 dots per inch and 256 colors at
a time. On pages slightly smaller than a typical 17-inch screen, the book
displays millions of colors at a resolution of more than 130 dots per inch. The
book's photos are therefore immensely sharper and richer than their electronic
counterparts.

Details that leap out in ink on paper are unrecognizable in phosphor under
glass. The quality of light, almost palpable on the page, is absent on the
screen. And the book's double-page "big pictures" of families with their
possessions dwarf all but the biggest computer displays.

The book is organized geographically. A standard information-retrieval device
known as a table of contents provides quick access, as does a stunning map based
on satellite photographs of the Earth. Moving from the table to the actual
contents is fast and easy even though some of the pages lack numbers. Digital
placeholders commonly known as "fingers" are not supplied, but using those
typically at hand lets you compare two sections with ease.

Navigating through the CD-ROM can be infuriating. The disk is organized along
four pathways: questionnaire, countries, lifestyles and families. Sometimes you
can jump easily from one place to another; often you cannot. To figure out
whether a photograph is supplemented by a video clip (grainy, tiny and decidedly
unspectacular), you must move the cursor over the photo and see if the arrow
changes to a camera. To reveal additional information, you may have to click on
an icon of a camera, a clipboard or a collection of maps. A "Roadmap" chart and
a "backtrack" button offer modest navigational assistance.

The publisher says the disk contains about 1,400 photos, the book about 360. The
CD-ROM also includes other information missing from the book, like responses to
the questionnaires that the families answered, slide shows narrated by Charles
Kuralt, overview maps of each country and the opening bars of national anthems.

But the book can display far more information at once, and uses that advantage
to create a much stronger editorial viewpoint. In the book, each "big picture"
is displayed alongside a caption describing the family and its possessions. The
CD-ROM uses tiny "pages" of short captions that identify only three or four
items at a time and even then obscure part of the picture. However, the CD-ROM's
lists do include possessions not included in the photos; in the book, these are
inconveniently noted on a page at the back.

What takes a couple of glances in the book can require many mouse clicks with
the CD. The book's double-page "material world at a glance" table brings
together a wealth of statistical and factual information. The disk omits some of
this data entirely and takes 36 separate screens to display the rest. Although
the CD-ROM can show the data as bar graphs, only one-third of the countries can
be displayed at once, and then only alphabetically, so statistics for Albania
and Vietnam cannot appear simultaneously.  Enlightening and amusing two-page
spreads of 16 small photos of meals, televisions and toilets around the world
appear as interludes in the book. Their equivalent in the CD-ROM includes
additional photos as well as sections on toys, music, recreation, animals,
transportation, homes, markets, kitchens, schools and most valuable possessions.
Unfortunately, the small format, low resolution and lack of captions make these
photos tantalizing rather than useful.

The book lacks the simplistic introduction narrated by Mr. Kuralt. The disk
lacks the book's detailed source notes and three introductory articles,
including a comment on methodology in which Mr. Menzel cheerfully admits that
the selection process included countries "I wanted to see" and an essay in which
the historian Paul Kennedy points out the importance of understanding the
project's findings "especially on a comparative basis," an aspect in which the
CD-ROM comes up particularly short.

The CD-ROM costs about $40, the book about $30. The book does not come with a
number you can call for technical help.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              122 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: LEGISLATION;
Law-Enforcement Agencies Differ on Need for More Power to Spy on Terror Suspects

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


Sharp differences between the Justice Department and the Treasury Department are
hampering the Clinton Administration's campaign for broad new powers to
investigate and monitor organizations suspected of plotting terrorist attacks,
law-enforcement officials said today.

The Administration is scrambling to flesh out its proposals in time for a
Thursday hearing by the Senate Judiciary Committee.

Administration officials said today that the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
its parent agency, the Justice Department, wanted new authority to monitor,
investigate and infiltrate groups suspected of planning terrorist attacks. But
they said that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and its parent
agency, the Treasury Department, saw less need for new powers and believed that
their existing authority was adequate.

On Sunday in Oklahoma City, President Clinton condemned the bombing of a Federal
office building there and said he would seek broad new powers to combat
terrorism. Although civil liberties groups said they feared a return to
government abuses like the harassment of Vietnam War protesters in the 1960's,
members of Congress said there was widespread support for such changes on
Capitol Hill, where lawmakers appear eager to move quickly. Mr. Clinton gave few
details of his proposal, leaving law-enforcement officials to work out specific
recommendations.

Differences between the F.B.I. and the firearms bureau have surfaced in the last
two days as officials from various Federal law-enforcement agencies have tried
to develop an official position on legislative proposals.

The rift mirrors disagreements that have often split the F.B.I. and the firearms
bureau in the last decade.

Stephen E. Higgins, who worked at the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
for 32 years and was director from 1982 to October 1993, said: "From an
institutional standpoint, the bureau felt that not much needed to be changed in
the existing rules. Those rules provide protections that innocent people needed
and did not hamper law enforcement that much."

Mr. Higgins said the firearms bureau "was not a strong proponent of making
wholesale changes in the rules for gathering intelligence or conducting criminal
investigations."

Whenever the Bush Administration tried to draft a comprehensive crime bill, he
said, "there was always some difference of opinion between the Justice
Department and the Treasury Department on how much change was necessary." The
Justice Department, with much broader law-enforcement and intelligence-gathering
responsibilities, "always wanted to go somewhat further" than the firearms
bureau, he said.

Mr. Higgins was director of the firearms bureau in February 1993 when four of
its agents were killed trying to carry out search and arrest warrants at the
compound of a religious sect, the Branch Davidians, near Waco, Tex. The compound
burned to the ground and some 80 of its residents died when F.B.I. agents
stormed the site after a 51-day standoff. Mr. Higgins retired early, in part
because he disagreed with Treasury officials who said he had not adequately
supervised the February raid.

A law-enforcement official at the Treasury Department who works closely with the
firearms agency said today, "We need more manpower and resources, but we are not
seeking more authority."

That official, who spoke on the condition that he not be named, said there was
"a tremendous potential for abuse" in some of the recent F.B.I. proposals to
relax the standards for investigating suspected terrorists.

F.B.I. officials have long expressed frustration with the current guidelines,
particularly the requirement that there be some indication of criminal activity
before the Government can open an investigation. Oliver B. Revell, a former top
official of the F.B.I., said this week: "That means you have to wait until you
have blood on the street before the bureau can act. You can't prevent what you
don't know about, and you can't know about a group if you can't investigate
until after they have committed an act of terrorism."

Carl Stern, the Justice Department spokesman, said today that there was vigorous
discussion among Administration officials preparing the President's
counterterrorism package. But he said he was unaware of any serious divisions
between the Treasury and the Justice Department. "If they weren't arguing, they
wouldn't be doing their job," he said.

James X. Dempsey, deputy director of the Center for National Security Studies, a
civil liberties organization, said today: "The F.B.I. is both an intelligence
agency and a law-enforcement agency. Sometimes the monitoring mentality of the
intelligence side infects the law-enforcement side of the house." By contrast,
he said, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has "a more clearly defined
goal, to go out and arrest people violating firearms or explosives laws."

Federal guidelines for investigating threats to domestic security were adopted
in 1976 by Edward H. Levi, who was then Attorney General. The rules were revised
and reissued in 1983 by another Attorney General, William French Smith.

The rules say, "A domestic security/terrorism investigation may be initiated
when the facts or circumstances reasonably indicate that two or more persons are
engaged in an enterprise for the purpose of furthering political or social goals
wholly or in part through activities that involve force or violence and a
violation of the criminal laws of the United States."

F.B.I. officials and former officials said the guidelines had been a source of
constant frustration.

But Mr. Higgins said that he and his colleagues at the firearms bureau had been
able to live within the constraints of the Attorney General's guidelines.
Violations of Federal gun laws often precede terrorist activity, they noted.

"In the Branch Davidian case," Mr. Higgins said, "we gathered a lot of
information about illegal activities, though we did not have a tap on the phones
or surveillance devices inside the compound when our agents tried to serve
warrants" on Feb. 28, 1993.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              123 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Soviet Archives: Half-Open, Dirty Window on Past

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2369 words


In early August 1930, Stalin wrote a routine note to his most loyal comrade in
the Soviet leadership, Vyacheslav M. Molotov, with 10 directives. The second one
dealt with the hoarding of coins, a problem the Kremlin was trying to deal with.

After venting his rage at the State Bank and the Finance Ministry, Stalin wrote,
"Definitely shoot two or three dozen wreckers from these apparats, including
several dozen common cashiers."

The note is one of 86 letters from Stalin to Molotov recently published by Yale
University Press, and one of thousands of documents that have come fluttering
from behind the long-impenetrable walls of Soviet archives since the Communist
state collapsed in 1991.

The flow has produced its share of sensations and revelations, big and small,
but also its frustrations. First among these is that the most important files
remain solidly off-limits.  And after the first wave of openness, American
scholars say access is being steadily curtailed, especially for records of the
post-Stalin period. More ominously, they report that secret-police agents have
recently reappeared at top archives and major research institutes.

That does not mean the flow has stopped. Far from it; the revelations that have
emerged, and are still emerging, are often dramatic.

The Stalin-Molotov letters give a tantalizing glimpse of the despot, ordering
political executions in writing long before the terror got under way in the
mid-1930's, delving into the smallest details of politics and the economy,
neatly organizing his directives and thoughts in numbered paragraphs and concise
orders.

Some other dramatic documents that have emerged include these:

*Proof of a direct order from the Soviet leadership to massacre Polish officers
at Katyn Forest in Russia in 1941.

*The Russian-language version of the secret protocol to the Nazi-Soviet pact in
1939.

*Evidence that the Russians were undecided about invading Poland during the
Solidarity years in the early 1980's.

*Proof that the Soviets had extensive information about the ill-fated Korean Air
Lines Flight 007, including the black box of the passenger jetliner shot down by
Soviet fighters in 1983.

*Evidence that Stalin ordered the North Korean invasion of South Korea in 1950.

Extensive transcripts of Politburo sessions and meetings of Warsaw Pact leaders
have come out, detailing their thoughts and strategies through the cold war.

They demonstrate, for instance, how wary the Soviets were of committing forces
to Afghanistan. A special Politburo report in April 1979, eight months before
Soviet forces swept into the country, declared, "It is clear that due to the
internal nature of the anti-governmental opposition, the use of Soviet troops in
repressing the Afghan counterrevolution would seriously damage the international
authority of the U.S.S.R. and would set back the process of disarmament."

But like many other archival discoveries, such findings often lead to more
questions. Are there other letters from Stalin, revealing far greater crimes and
plots, that Molotov withheld when he turned his files over to the archives in
1969? Are there documents that prove or disprove whether Stalin ordered the 1934
assassination of Sergei M. Kirov, the Leningrad party chief? That Alger Hiss was
a spy? That there was a Soviet hand in the assassination of John F. Kennedy? Or
in the shooting of Pope John Paul II in 1981?

The Output
Despite Volume, Much Is Sealed

In the West, the archives have spawned something of a new industry.

The Cold War International History Project in Washington, headed by James G.
Hershberg, has organized two major conferences and has published several
bulletins of archival findings. The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and
Peace at Stanford is microfilming huge volumes of Communist Party records. Crown
Publishers has reportedly signed a contract to publish materials from the K.G.B.
archives. Various joint projects have been set up to prepare guides to Russian
archival holdings.

Yale University Press recently issued the first two volumes of an ambitious,
18-book "Annals of Communism" series of archival documents. The first two were a
collection of Stalin's letters to Molotov, which includes the 1930 note about
the hoarding of coins, and "The Secret World of American Communism," which
details links between Moscow and the American Communist Party from the 1920's to
1945.

Russians, too, have burrowed into the cache. Gen. Dmitri Volkogonov, a military
historian who has already drawn on newly available materials for biographies of
Stalin and Lenin, now plans a two-volume history of the Soviet Union seen
through the eyes of seven Soviet leaders, from Lenin to Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

The Progress Publishing Group, once part of the Soviet propaganda machine, plans
to release a laser disk with documents, photos and documentary film about
Hitler, including a 1970 order from Yuri V. Andropov, who was then K.G.B. chief,
ordering that the remains of the Nazi dictator be burned.

Yet for all the output, the most intriguing Soviet documents remain sealed in
the Presidential Archive, which was set up by Mr. Gorbachev, the last Soviet
President, to safeguard important information from the disintegrating Communist
Party, and was taken over after Mr. Gorbachev's fall by President Boris N.
Yeltsin.

Almost all the most dramatic disclosures have come from this file, but usually
only when Mr. Yeltsin has chosen to release them for political reasons. Many
were made public in the case against the Communist Party before the
Constitutional Court, others as gifts to foreign governments, others to
embarrass Mr. Gorbachev. Researchers have had no independent access.

Similarly, K.G.B. and military files have been made public only at the
discretion of their masters. The Foreign Ministry has granted many requests for
material, but still keeps its catalogues classified, leaving it to archivists to
determine what material a researcher might need.

"Over all, I don't think things have improved," said Mark Kramer, a history
professor at Brown and Harvard who has been one of the most active American
users of Soviet archives. "In fact, they've deteriorated."

Mr. Kramer said that on his last trip to Russia he was shown an internal
directive dated Dec. 10, 1993, that set out a list of areas of Communist Party
activities whose records were being put off-limits.

They include the party Secretariat, which ran the party; the departments dealing
with international affairs and administrative organs, which included the K.G.B.
and the military; medium machine-building, which handled nuclear weapons; all
intelligence agencies, and documents on technological and scientific research.

When Mr. Kramer tried to get documents on these subjects on a recent visit, he
was refused. "I was even not allowed to see documents I translated in 1992," he
said. "I get the sense that a fair amount does pertain to the security services,
the K.G.B. and foreign intelligence, and they just don't like to have any of
their documents released."

Mr. Kramer and other researchers say the tightening of access correlates in part
with a broader revival in Russia of a sense of continuity with the Soviet Union.


Tightened Access
After Initial Burst, Files Start to Close

In the immediate aftermath of the collapse of the Communist Party in 1991, the
prevailing mood in Russia was to distance the new system from the old. It was
then that archives were opened, and that many of the most revealing documents
emerged. But the initial euphoria soon waned under economic and political
turmoil, while Russia's foreign policy recovered from the early infatuation with
the West.

The turning point, researchers agree, was the publication in The New York Times
on April 12, 1993, of a document culled from the Soviet archives by an
Australian researcher, Stephen J. Morris, which purported to be the Russian
translation of a Vietnamese report saying the real number of American prisoners
in North Vietnam was three times the number publicly acknowledged by Hanoi.

Though the document was not particularly embarrassing to Moscow, it was used as
a pretext to dismiss the director of the contemporary Communist archive, Rem
Usikov, and to tighten access greatly. Mr. Usikov's successor, Anatoly
Prokopenko, is reported to have told a researcher, "Yes, these documents have
been declassified, but that doesn't mean people should be allowed to look at
them."

More recently, the Hoover Institution project to microfilm 25 million pages from
the Communist archives has come under fire as a pilfering of Russia's national
heritage. Yuri Afanaseyev, a historian with solid democratic credentials,
asserted that the state archive committee was "selling out Russia's past."

The entire idea of archives as public domain is novel to a nation that has
always regarded them as a tool for officials and bureaucrats. Many archives are
still considered the property of agencies like the intelligence service or the
Foreign Ministry, and Russian archivists still believe that they are doing
researchers a great favor by letting them in.

Another problem is the sheer volume of material and the big decrease in
Government financing. A joint task force of the American Association for the
Advancement of Slavic Studies and the American Historical Association reported
that the 17 state archives of the Russian Federation alone include 65.3 million
files on more than 300 miles of shelves, not to mention 2,200 republic, regional
and local depositories controlled by the Russian State Committee on Archival
Affairs.

Most are in dire need of money. The Russian State Historical Archive in St.
Petersburg, housed in the 18th-century buildings of the Holy Synod and the
Imperial Senate, have been declared in major danger of destruction by Western
experts.

And just when researchers have come flooding in, those archivists who can have
been leaving for other jobs because of low pay. In a recent conversation in
Moscow, Sergei V. Mironenko, the director of the Russian State Archive, pointed
to his secretary and whispered that her salary was not enough to buy food.

Like many other archivists, Mr. Mironenko has tried to line up outside
publishing or cooperative agreements to make ends meet. That, however, has
raised charges of commercialization. Many Western researchers have complained
about what they view as exorbitant copying or "access" fees, and scholars have
criticized some of the exclusive arrangements between archives and publishers.

The Crown arrangement to publish K.G.B. materials has come under special fire
because it would essentially allow the political police to decide what to
publish about itself without independent scrutiny, and without declassifying its
holdings.

Distorted History
Picture of the Past Not Always True

Apart from all the problems of logistics, cost and access, scholars have
reaffirmed what they always knew, that files are only a partial image of the
past, and not always an accurate one. A current example is a book by a Stalinist
K.G.B. operative named Pavel Sudoplatov, who asserted in his memoir, "Special
Tasks," that the K.G.B. received secret atomic information from several eminent
Western scientists, including Niels Bohr.

Files found later have exonerated Mr. Bohr, but the book has dramatized the
danger of releasing partial information or publishing isolated witnesses,
especially former K.G.B. agents. The danger is particularly large because the
K.G.B. files, like the secret police files in East Germany and other political
files, name countless people, not all of them necessarily collaborators.

The Yale University collection of documents on the American Communist Party, for
instance, has two 1942 documents about Edmund W. Stevens, an American journalist
who spent most of his life in Moscow. Nobody doubted that he sympathized with
the Soviet Union, but nobody knew what he did.

The Yale book carries a request from Gen. Pavel M. Fitin asking urgent
information about Mr. Stevens, "a former leader of the American Komsomol." The
reply says that Mr. Stevens, who died in 1992, was a member in good standing of
the American Communist Party, and that he "could be useful in Moscow." No more.

One problem is that in a police state like the Soviet Union, many of the most
damaging directives were probably never committed to paper, while many documents
that did get circulated were intended to bolster the standing of a particular
official, and so did not necessarily reflect the truth. Many sensitive documents
have also been destroyed -- by Lavrenti P. Beria, the secret police chief, or in
World War II, or during de-Stalinization.

Yet a remarkable volume of incriminating documents do survive, testament to a
system that believed its secrets would never become public. Long lists of mass
executions and tortures ordered by Stalin have survived, as well as letters by
Lenin ordering a secret terror campaign in Latvia and Estonia as early as 1917,
the year of the Bolshevik Revolution.

So Western scholars have learned to treat the archives more soberly. "The first
wave in the archives was a search for revelations," Mr. Hershberg said. "The
second wave has been more a re-evaluation of what is known and the integration
of new material into history."

For scholars trained in assessing the partial evidence available during the cold
war, the problem has often been not too little, but too much. William Taubman,
professor at Amherst College, had to repeatedly delay publication of his
biography of Nikita S. Khrushchev while he waded through the many new witnesses
and documents that were constantly becoming available.

Like many other scholars who have worked with the new evidence, Mr. Taubman said
his fundamental image of the man and the period proved accurate. What he gained
was a wealth of detail.

"I think I've learned a ton of stuff," he said. "Not so much a kind of smoking
gun -- like 'Khrushchev plotted the Kennedy assassination' -- but tons of
details about the man, anecdotes, incidents, which enable me, I hope, to depict
a living, breathing human being, rather than a caricature."

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Part of a 1926 letter to Vyacheslav M. Molotov, shown above with
Stalin, in the first volume of a Yale University Press series from Soviet
archives: "Belenkii told me that 1) Trotsky was back in Moscow as early as
Wednesday morning; 2) Preobrazhenskii went to visit him in Berlin (for a
rendevous?). Interesting. Well, all the best, J. Stalin" ('Stalin's Letters to
Molotov, 1925-1936')

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              124 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: THE FAR RIGHT;
Bomb Echoes Extremists' Tactics

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words


Whoever blew up the Federal building in Oklahoma City used tactics that are
strikingly similar to those urged by far-right advocates of "leaderless
resistance" against the Government, according to civil liberties experts who
keep track of militant groups.

The idea was developed by two former leaders of the Ku Klux Klan and has been
promoted by some of the self-styled citizen militias that have sprung up across
the county.  "Leaderless resistance" refers to the need to keep the planning of
terrorist attacks confined to individuals or very small groups to prevent
infiltration by the police.

According to the civil-liberties groups, another tactic adopted by some
far-right militias is "severation," an initiation rite associated with white
supremacists who believe that only through severing all ties to government can
they truly be free. Believers are urged to tear up their Social Security cards,
driver's licenses and other personal documents.

Leaders of one paramilitary group, the Michigan Militia, have said that James
Nichols, the Decker, Mich., farmer who was charged yesterday with conspiring to
build bombs, urged their members to take such steps at a meeting in Sanilac
County, Mich. But they said that he was asked to leave because his demands were
too radical.

Federal authorities have not directly connected any militia activities with the
Oklahoma City bombing. But Timothy J. McVeigh, the suspect charged in the
bombing, attended at least one militia meeting in Sanilac County with Mr.
Nichols, according to the group's leader. In addition, a Florida newspaper, the
Tribune of St. Lucie County, reported on Tuesday that witnesses said they saw
Mr. McVeigh at a militia meeting in Florida last year as a bodyguard to Mark
Koernke, a 37-year-old militia strategist from Dexter, Mich. Mr. Koernke has
denied knowing Mr. McVeigh.

Experts who have followed far-right groups for many years say that the citizen
militia movement was started with help from white supremacy leaders who have
shaped its ideology, recruitment and tactics.

The target of the Oklahoma City bombing, a large Federal office building, was
the sort of symbol talked about in "Hunter," a book published in 1992 by William
Pierce, head of the racist National Alliance in West Virginia and a close ally
of Louis Beam, a former Ku Klux Klan leader in Texas who was tried for sedition
in the late 1980's and acquitted by a Federal jury. In "Hunter," Mr. Pierce
described attacks on Federal installations by small, leaderless cells of white
supremacists seeking to ignite a civil war.

"The Oklahoma City bombing paralleled exactly the leaderless resistance model
developed by Louis Beam, who has been talking about this to militias all over
the country," said Daniel Levitas, an Atlanta researcher who studies the white
supremacy movement.

The ties between white supremacists and leaders of the militia movement were
first identified late last year in separate reports by the Anti-Defamation
League and the Southern Poverty Law Center, a human-rights group in Montgomery,
Ala. These and other groups say that the movement itself is largely the
outgrowth of organizing in the Northwest by white supremacist leaders, foremost
among them Mr. Beam.

Militia leaders in Michigan and other states say their groups were formed solely
to defend their communities against the Federal Government. But the groups'
rhetoric -- expressed in pamphlets, on shortwave radio shows and on the Internet
-- is much more aggressive, suggesting that offensive action against the
Government is warranted in some cases.

"Initially, they seem to discuss the issues bothering millions of Americans --
crime, the Government, education -- quite rationally," said Rabbi Abraham
Cooper, associate dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a human-rights group in
Los Angeles. "The fact is that once they get somebody in, behind the door are
the conspiracy theories, the notion that everything the Government stands for is
evil, and that in the name of patriotism, you have to take the matter into you
own hands."

Citizen militias have formed in at least 30 states, particularly in rural
regions and in the West. Their call for individuals to take up arms against the
Government have also been embraced by other grass-roots movements on the
American right.

In Nye County, Nev., a local commissioner, Dick Carver, who has led a fight
against the Federal Government's right to own or manage national parks, or to
regulate grazing, mining and logging, has said that counties are the highest
level of government and that the Federal Government has no authority to own or
manage national parks or grazing and timber lands. And his county has adopted a
resolution saying as much.

But according to evidence cited by civil liberties groups, Mr. Carver has also
supported militia organizing in Nevada and has close ties to the Jubilee, a
white supremacy and anti-Semitic newspaper published in Midpines, Calif., that
has become an important source of information for militias and features a column
by Mr. Beam of the Ku Klux Klan.

Last summer, in defiance of an armed Federal police officer, Mr. Carver drove a
bulldozer and reopened a long-closed road in the Toiyabe National Forest in
Nevada, an act that prompted the Clinton Administration to file suit against the
county in March. According to Tarso Ramos, an investigator at the Western States
Center, a research group in Portland, Ore., Mr. Carver has been a prominent
speaker at two national conferences the Jubilee newspaper has sponsored in
California.

Mr. Carver could not be reached yesterday, but in recent interviews has denied
that he is racist or anti-Semitic. He has also said that his "county supremacy
movement" disavows violence and will win politically, "not by threatening or
intimidating a Federal employee."

But Jonathan Mozzochi, a researcher at the Coalition for Human Dignity, a
human-rights group in Portland, said Mr. Carver's participation in Jubilee
conferences gives the newspaper's racist, anti-Government ideas legitimacy among
militias and even in factions of the populist Wise Use movement in the West.

"White supremacist elements add a degree of militancy and experience in conflict
with the Federal Government that folks in the Wise Use movement and militias
appreciate," said Mr. Mozzochi. "And the Wise Use folks like Carver offer
electoral experience, which is important in the fight."

The militia movement, which views the siege in Waco, Tex., as an act of
Government tyranny, really grew out of an earlier siege in 1992 at the home of
Randy Weaver, a white supremacist in Ruby Ridge, Idaho. In that incident, which
lasted weeks, Federal agents killed Mr. Weaver's wife and son.

Among the ultra-conservative advocates who organized around the Ruby Ridge siege
were James "Bo" Gritz, a Green Beret commander in Vietnam, who was then running
for President on the racist Populist Party ticket.


LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Ku Klux Klan leader, Louis Beam, is said to have developed the
notion of "leaderless resistance" against the Government. He spoke in 1989 in
Pulaski, Tenn. (Southern Poverty Law Center/Klanwatch)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              125 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sergio Fenoaltea, Italian Diplomat, 86

SECTION: Section D;  Page 24;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 234 words


Sergio Fenoaltea of Italy, a familiar figure in United States diplomatic,
cultural and social circles as Ambassador in the 1960's, died on April 13 at his
home in Marino, near Rome. He was 86.

He suffered a brief illness, his family said.

Mr. Fenoaltea presented his credentials to President Kennedy at the White House
in May 1961. His resignation in 1967 caused a trans-Atlantic stir because he
seemed to disagree with his Government, particularly with what he felt was
Foreign Minister Amintore Fanfani's lukewarm commitment to the North American
Treaty Organization.

The immediate cause was Mr. Fanfani's objections to renewed American aerial
bombardments of North Vietnam as a hindrance to peace.

Trained in economics and law, Mr. Fenoaltea had decades of experience in
diplomacy and government. Born in Rome, he was a consistent opponent of
Mussolini and spent time in prison until July 25, 1943, when the Fascist
dictatorship crumbled.

He was graduated from the University of Rome, where he also earned a law degree,
and practiced law intermittently.

In 1952, he became NATO Assistant Under Secretary for Political Affairs. Before
he arrived in Washington, he was his country's Ambassador to Canada and Belgium.

Mr. Fenoaltea is survived by a daughter, Annalina Sayad Porozynski of Sebring,
Fla.; a son, Stefano of Philadelphia; five grandchildren, and four
great-grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              126 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Carl A. Gerstacker, 78, Dow Chemical Chairman

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA

SECTION: Section D;  Page 25;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


Carl A. Gerstacker, chairman of the Dow Chemical Company from 1960 to 1976, died
on Sunday night in Midland, Mich. He was 78.

The cause of death was leukemia, said his stepson, William D. Schuette of
Midland.

Mr. Gerstacker's tenure as chief of the nation's second largest chemical company
coincided with growing public opposition to the Vietnam War and the company's
position as the military's sole supplier of napalm, a substance used in
firebombs.

Recruiters from Dow Chemical were chased off college campuses in the late 1960's
and antiwar demonstrators protested at stockholders meetings, objecting to
civilian casualties caused by napalm bombing. Mr. Gerstacker defended the
company's production of the napalm as necessary to defend American troops in
Vietnam.

"You are asking us to stop arbitrarily the supply of weapons to our young men
that have been drafted and who are serving in a far foreign land," Mr.
Gerstacker told protesters at a stockholders meeting in 1969. But Dow lost the
napalm contract to a smaller company in 1970, and has not produced it since.

Mr. Gerstacker had a family connection to Dow Chemical through an uncle, James
D. Pardee, who was one of the original backers of H. H. Dow when he founded the
company to produce chemicals from brine springs found near Midland, in
east-central Michigan.

Mr. Gerstacker grew up in Cleveland and became interested in business and
finance, but at the suggestion of his father he majored in chemical engineering
at the University of Michigan, graduating in 1938.

He joined Dow the same year as a production engineer. Two years later he joined
the Army and supervised the production of munitions throughout World War II.
Rejoining the company in 1946, Mr. Gerstacker moved into purchasing and finance,
and by 1950 was appointed treasurer of the company. He was named a vice
president in 1955 and chairman of the finance committee of the company's board
in 1959.

Besides his stepson he is survived by his wife, Esther S. Gerstacker; two
daughters, Bette M. Gerstacker of Honolulu and Lisa G. Walsh of Boulder, Colo.,
and two stepdaughters, Sandra S. Joys of Greenwich, Conn., and Gretchen S.
Schuette of Troutdale, Ore.

NAME: Carl A. Gerstacker

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              127 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Personal Health

BYLINE: By Jane E. Brody

SECTION: Section C;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk;  Health Page

LENGTH: 1173 words


THE wounds from the Oklahoma City bombing last week are far more than physical
ones, for the minds of many of the people directly and indirectly involved have
suffered damage that can linger long after injuries to the body heal. Those who
escaped harm and those who took part in rescue and recovery efforts may be as
severely affected emotionally as the surviving victims and the families of the
dead and injured.

Experts say witnesses to death and destruction, such as rescuers at a disaster
site like the Federal building in Oklahoma City, are especially vulnerable to
lasting emotional injury when children are harmed and the element of horror is
pronounced.

The wound is called post-traumatic stress disorder, but long before 1980, when
it first received official psychiatric recognition, it was known as battle
fatigue, shell shock or war neurosis. Pressure from veterans of the Vietnam War,
in which as many as 800,000 service men and women were left with severe
emotional scars, finally led the psychiatric profession to include the disorder
in its official diagnostic manual.

In the years since, therapists have come to realize just how widespread and
potentially crippling the disorder can be. It can affect not only those who
narrowly escape death in accidents, assaults and natural disasters but also
those who witness accidents, those who try to save victims and those whose
family members or close friends are involved in fatal or potentially fatal
episodes or who develop a life-threatening disease.

Dr. Richard D. Allen, director of the Counseling Center at the University of
California at Santa Cruz, an editor of the "Handbook of Post-Disaster
Interventions," says the best way to protect against post-traumatic stress
disorder is to set up professionally run debriefing sessions immediately after
the incident to allow people to talk about their feelings and to understand that
acute stress reactions like flashbacks, nightmares and suddenly being
overwhelmed by feelings are "normal reactions to an abnormal event."

Dr. Allen said people were often empowered by such debriefing sessions, emerging
with an ability to initiate activities that once more give them a sense of
usefulness and control over their lives.

The Syndrome

Without intervention, post-traumatic stress disorder can have devastating,
long-lasting and even life-long consequences.

Among the common symptoms are nightmares and insomnia, anxiety or panic attacks,
sudden vivid memories so strong that the person thinks the incident is happening
again, outbursts of irritability or explosive anger and avoidance of any place
or thing or person that is a reminder of the traumatic event. Other symptoms are
persistent depression because of an inability to come to terms with the impact
of the trauma, self-medication with alcohol or drugs to counter distressing
feelings and thoughts and guilt over having survived when others died.

Perhaps the most perplexing symptom to relatives and friends is emotional
numbness: a withdrawal of affection and avoidance of close emotional ties with
family members, friends and colleagues, the very people who can best help to
ease the pain.

Other common aftermaths include being always on guard for danger and being very
easily startled. Another common symptom is panic attack in which the throat
tightens, the heart races, the breathing rate rises and nausea and dizziness
occur.

Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder can start weeks, months, even years
after the upsetting event. Sometimes they emerge only after a second relatively
innocuous incident that reminds the person of a previous, more traumatic event.
That is believed to be the case with some people who were physically or sexually
abused as children and whose feelings had been suppressed until a trauma in
adult life brought them to the fore. When symptoms of the disorder occur long
after the traumatic event, people often fail to recognize the connection, which
can seriously delay the diagnosis and result in futile doctor-hopping.

Many traumatic situations can set off the disorder. Among them are being raped
or criminally assaulted, witnessing a murder or severe beating, being a victim
of or witness to a vehicular or industrial accident, being a victim of child or
spouse abuse, being a hostage or prisoner of war, having a child struck by an
automobile or found to have cancer or being involved in a natural disaster like
a flood or hurricane or one inflicted by humans, like the Oklahoma City bombing.

The disorder is more common than even most experts realize. For example, in a
recent national survey of 4,008 women, Dr. Dean G. Kilpatrick of the National
Crime Victims Research and Treatment Center at the Medical University of South
Carolina in Charleston found that nearly one woman in five had been the victim
of a completed rape or aggravated assault or both. Over all, nearly 13 percent
of those surveyed had experienced post-traumatic stress disorder. Projected to
the country as a whole, that would mean the lives of 12.3 million women could be
impaired by the disorder.

In another survey of 12,500 households, Dr. Kilpatrick reported that nearly 10
percent had lost a family member to homicide or drunken driving and that one in
five family members had developed post-traumatic stress disorder as a result.

Treatment

At a national conference held this month by the Anxiety Disorders Association of
America, Dr. Terence M. Keane, a psychologist who is director of the National
Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder at the Veterans Administration Medical
Center in Boston, reported that "cognitive behavioral" treatment, a kind of
systematic desensitization, had been the most successful approach to date for
this and other anxiety disorders.

Patients are taught deep relaxation techniques, and while they are in a relaxed
state, they are gradually exposed to the circumstances that provoke their
trauma-induced symptoms, at first through their imagination and eventually in
the real world.

Thus, a person traumatized by a automobile accident might first envision sitting
in a car, then riding in one, then driving one. After several sessions have
occurred without inducing symptoms, the sequence would be repeated in a real
car.

Talk therapy, an integral part of the treatment, helps patients understand and
master their trauma reactions and to get on with their lives. In many cases,
therapy in groups of people with the same or similar traumas can be very
helpful. Sometimes, when anxiety or depression is especially severe, medication
is used temporarily to enable patients to respond better to the therapy.

Dr. Sally Winston, a psychologist who is co-director of the Anxiety and Stress
Disorders Institute of Maryland in Towson, cautioned relatives, friends and
acquaintances against saying unhelpful things like "it's God's will," "bad
things happen to good people" and "you should be over that by now." Untreated,
post-traumatic stress syndrome often gets worse, not better.


LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Wednesday, May 3, is National Anxiety Disorders Screening Day. Free
screenings for the full spectrum of anxiety disorders -- including
post-traumatic stress syndrome, panic disorder, phobias and obsessive-compulsive
disorder -- are being offered by hospitals, clinics, institutes and
psychotherapists throughout the country. To find a nearby facility, call (800)
442-2020. Those that offer screening can also provide treatment, if needed,
usually for a fee.
Chart: "Where to Get Help"

The American Psychiatric Association has published a pamphlet, "Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder," which can be obtained free, along with 15 others, by writing
to the association, Dept. NYT, 1400 K Street N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005.
Another pamphlet, "Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder," is available for $2.50 from
the Anxiety Disorders Association of America, 6000 Executive Boulevard, No. 513,
Rockville, Md. 20852.

For those concerned about panic disorder, the National Institute of Mental
Health offers free brochures and resource information to those who call (800)
64-PANIC (647-2642) or write to the institute, Panic Disorder Education Program,
Parklawn Building, Room 799, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, Md. 20857.

Finally, Jerilynn Ross, president of the Anxiety Disorders Association of
America, has produced a helpful new paperback book, "Triumph Over Fear"
(Bantam), that discusses the diagnosis and treatment of anxiety, panic attacks
and phobias.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              128 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
To Vietnam, With Love And a Deep Respect

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 613 words


"Starting Place," Robert Kramer's documentary study of Vietnam two decades after
the end of the war, produces a strange, almost nostalgic sense of dislocation.
This impressionistic portrait of a country struggling to build a competitive
economy while holding on to its traditions offers the sort of glowingly romantic
picture of the Vietnamese as gentle, hard-working, enlightened people that the
leftist antiwar protesters who visited the country in the late 1960's brought
back to the United States.

Mr. Kramer, who lives in France, was one visitor. In 1967, he and a group of
politically motivated independent film makers formed a collective called the
Newsreel, which produced over 70 films dealing with the civil rights movement
and the Vietnam War. In 1969, the group was invited by North Vietnam to make a
film in Hanoi, and a delegation of eight, including Mr. Kramer, traveled there
and made a movie called "People's War." Two years ago, he revisited Vietnam with
a film crew. In "Starting Place," he interviews many of those he met there 24
years earlier.

As "Starting Place," which opens today at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, is not
being shown in tandem with "People's War," one is given only the sketchiest
reference points for many of those who appear on the screen. This handsomely
photographed documentary conveys a strong sense of place, both physically and
emotionally, but its images are fragmentary, there is no historical overview and
locations are not identified.

Despite the absence of specific information, the film succeeds in portraying
Vietnam as a country that has found a measure of serenity in the aftermath of
the conflict. Ho Chi Minh is remembered as a saintly political and spiritual
leader with the status of a holy man. And little if any rancor is expressed
about America. One former North Vietnamese soldier who operated antiaircraft
guns against American bombers marvels at the bravery of the pilots who had to
fly into the barrage. The most heartbreaking image is of a child ballerina who
lost her legs in the war.

Teams of Vietnamese bricklayers and carpenters are shown rebuilding the country
using crude technology. There is talk of long-term social goals, of planning for
the year 2010 and of qualities in the national character that allow for
objectivity and the distinguishing of true from false, good from evil.

Worries are also voiced that industrialization and the encroachment of other
cultures have already begun corrupting the younger generation. Neighboring
Thailand is cited for having become "the brothel of the industrialized world."

A recurring figure, photographed in extreme close-up, often with tears in her
eyes, is named Linda Evans, a woman who traveled with Mr. Kramer and his party
to North Vietnam in 1969. Ms. Evans, who says her personal philosophy was deeply
influenced by the trip, is serving a 40-year prison term in the United States
for a politically motivated crime the film does not specify. Such crucial
omissions make this cinematic valentine to the Vietnamese people seem
frustratingly incomplete.

STARTING PLACE

Written (in English, French and Vietnamese, with English subtitles) and directed
by Robert Kramer; director of photography, Mr. Kramer; edited by Christine
Benoit, Mr. Kramer and Marie-Helene Mora; produced by Les Films d'Ici, La Sept,
the Association of Vietnamese Film Makers, Channel Four and the Centre National
de La Cinematographie of France; released by Interama. At the Joseph Papp Public
Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village. Running time: 80 minutes. This film
is not rated.

WITH: Robert Kramer, Linda Evans and Viet Tung.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              129 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

McNamara Took a Long Step to Heal Our Vietnam Wound

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


To the Editor:

In "Mr. McNamara's War" (editorial, April 12) you savagely attack Robert S.
McNamara's acknowledgment of error in Vietnam as "prime-time apology and stale
tears," declaring that he "must not escape the lasting moral condemnation of his
countrymen."

No mea culpa deserves such contempt. It is true that his comes late -- very late
-- but it should be saluted, not scorned. This country can never be truly
reunited until the Vietnam wound is closed. Mr. McNamara, by his admission, has
taken a long step toward the healing. What he needs now is company. The
Presidents of those years are dead, but most of the other warlords are still
among us. Let's hear from them.

You state: "Fifty-eight thousand Americans got to come home in body bags. Mr.
McNamara, while tormented by his role in the war, got a sinecure at the World
Bank and summers at the Vineyard."

These are the facts. Robert S. McNamara became Secretary of Defense on Jan. 21,
1961, and resigned on Nov. 29, 1967. On Jan. 19, 1968 -- nearly two months later
-- the United States high command reported the total number of Americans killed
in Vietnam as 16,459.

Our bloodiest years in Vietnam lay ahead. By the end of 1969 there would be
39,893 dead. Your final figure is correct: 58,135. But that was more than six
years after Mr. McNamara left the Pentagon. So if it was Mr. McNamara's war, was
it not also Mr. Rusk's? Mr. Bundy's? Mr. Clifford's? Mr. Rostow's? Mr. Laird's?
And -- last, but certainly not least -- Mr. Kissinger's?

As writers we have always taken a solemn view of our responsibilities as
Americans. Fifty years ago we served in the United States Marine Corps. We
vigorously denounced the war in Vietnam -- though never the brave men who fought
there -- and we openly, often bitterly, disagreed with all who were prosecuting
it, including Robert McNamara.

We welcome his acknowledgment that the United States was wrong then, believing
that America can never be damaged by an act of contrition, and we invite all
those who stood with him to join him now on his knees.

WILLIAM STYRON
WILLIAM MANCHESTER
Roxbury, Conn., April 23, 1995

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              130 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

McNamara Took a Long Step to Heal Our Vietnam Wound;
A Day Late

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 245 words


To the Editor:

The last several days I have followed the news of Robert McNamara's memoir "In
Retrospect" with great interest mixed with furious bitterness, awkward chagrin
and appalled disappointment -- among other things. I served in Vietnam as an
extremely reluctant, highly skeptical draftee and returned from overseas
thoroughly radicalized and unconscionably bitter.

I became a writer mostly out of a desire to cipher out what it was I saw, what I
did and what I had become. In the intervening 27 years the radicalized
bitterness has mellowed, but I am afraid will never be completely ameliorated.

My own first reaction to the news that Mr. McNamara now thinks that that epoch
of greed, arrogance and stupidity was a mistake is to say that he's a day late
and a dollar short. In 1968, when he was no longer Secretary of Defense, his
loyalty to an egregious lie was -- and will always be -- the shame of his life.

When he says that he is very emotional, cries easily and agonized about the
conduct of the war, we can only take him at his word. I only ask that all his
cries were, and are, good ones.

The men of my generation have waited a long time for a public apology, and I
suspect that Mr. McNamara's statement is as close as we're going to get. But
does it get him off the hook? Not on my block.

LARRY HEINEMANN
Chicago, April 12, 1995
The writer is author of "Paco's Story," a Vietnam War novel that won the 1987
National Book Award.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              131 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 965 words



International A3-13

SLOW CHANGE IN SOUTH AFRICA
A year after South Africans voted in the country's first free election, slum
dwellers in Soweto-on-Sea, like people throughout the country, find improvements
are few. A1



JAPANESE CULT MEMBERS HELD
Two key suspects in the nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway system were
arrested after the police found them hiding in an underground room below the
headquarters of the Aum Shinrikyo religious sect. A1

WAR CRIMES TRIAL OPENS
A Bosnian Serb pleaded not guilty to charges including the murder, torture and
rape of Muslims in Bosnia at the opening hearing of the first international war
crimes tribunal since the end of World War II. A3

ISRAEL SHIFTS WEST BANK TROOPS
In a move that seemed a prelude to a long-awaited withdrawal of Israeli forces
from some Palestinian towns, Israel said it would reassign soldiers at three
army bases in the West Bank. A12

U.S. AND RUSSIAN OFFICIALS MEET
With relations between the U.S. and Russia at a low point, Secretary of State
Christopher and Russian Foreign Minister Kozyrev staged a dress rehearsal for
when their Presidents meet next month. A7

FRENCH CANDIDATE MOVES RIGHT
Jacques Chirac's campaign to win the second round of the French presidential
election on May 7 has taken a sharp turn to the right. A8

Argentina is trying to come to grips with its tortured past. A5

Hutu refugees in Rwanda expressed hope for the future. A9

Turkey said its military operation in Iraq was a success. A13

La Laguna Journal: A proposed salt plant threatens whales. A4

National A16-23, B6, D24

THE COURT OVERRULES CONGRESS
The Supreme Court ruled that Congress acted beyond its authority five years ago
when it made possession of a gun within 1,000 feet of a school a Federal crime.
A1

NEW ANTI-TERRORISM MEASURES
President Clinton proposed easing the ban on military involvement in law
enforcement to let it help investigate crimes involving chemical, biological or
nuclear weapons.  A1

HATRED VIA THE RADIO WAVES
In the past decade, shortwave radio has become a vital tool of extremists for
organizing and for airing anti-government views.  A1

INTERNET BOMB-MAKING RECIPES
Weeks before the bombing, human rights groups noticed a surge in communications
traffic on the Internet about bomb-making.  A22

HOW WAS THE BOMBING FINANCED?
Federal agents have begun pursuing a trail of money left by the suspected
bombers, law-enforcement officials said.  A20

A FORESHADOWING OF VIOLENCE
In a letter to a newspaper in 1992, the Oklahoma City bombing suspect suggested
that violence might be the only way to change things.  A20

A MOMENT OF SILENCE TO MOURN
In Oklahoma City and around the nation, one minute of silence was observed to
mourn and remember the victims in the bombing.  A21

FUTURE DIRECTOR VOWS CHANGE
John Deutch, nominated to be the next Director of Central Intelligence, pledged
to change the agency "down to the bare bones." A1

A DISPUTED VIAL
Lawyers for O. J. Simpson put their microscope on the garbled testimony of a
junior evidence collector regarding a vial of Mr. Simpson's blood.  A16

SENATE BUDGET TALKS STALLED
The chairman of the Senate Budget Committee postponed his first meeting on next
year's budget to line up the votes he needs.  A18

'WE WERE TERRIBLY WRONG'
Robert McNamara, an architect of Vietnam policy under Presidents Kennedy and
Johnson, apologized for the tragedy of Vietnam.  A16

RISKS FOR TEEN-AGE MOTHERS
A new study says biological factors may be an important reason that teen-ager
girls who become pregnant have a higher risk of premature babies.  A23

WOMEN IN THE WORKPLACE
While 1 in 5 working women holds a secretarial job, women now constitute a
majority in many jobs once dominated by men.  B6

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

Barbet Schroeder.  C13

Theater: "Night and Her Stars." C13

Marcel Marceau.  C14

Music: Krystian Zimerman.  C14

Van Halen.  C18

Dance: Ballet Theater in "A
Brahms Symphony." C13

City Ballet opens.  C16

Books: New Anne Tyler.  C17

Television: "Hard Times." C18

The Home Section C1-11

At Kips Bay, opposites that enchant.  C1

At home with Blair Brown: Never the ingenue.  C1

Now chosen, Chinese girls take to U.S.  C1

S.A.T. software: does it work?  C2

The boy wonders of Victoriana.  C4

Sports B8-15

Baseball: Yankees begin where they left off -- on top.  B9

Basketball: Knicks know that Cavs can be dangerous.  B13

Columns: Anderson on the return of baseball's fans.  B9

Rhoden on a 73-year-old woman who still jumps high.  B14

Smith on baseball B12

Hockey: Rangers beat Lightning to continue playoff drive.  B9

Devils blow early lead at home and tie with Penguins.  B15

Capitals earn 2 important points by holding off Islanders.  B15

SportsPeople B13

Yacht Racing: Conner's Stars &
Stripes reaches the final.  B9

Obituaries D24-25

Francis B. Trudeau, founder of a biological research institute.  D25

Art Fleming, "Jeopardy" host.  D25

Marion Burbank Stevens Rice, dance teacher and producer.  D25

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

Combustible rhetoric.

Mr. Yeltsin's cease-fire.

Cold comfort from the Mayor.

Maureen Dowd: Ginger Rogers.

Letters

Frank Rich: New world terror.

William Safire: The paranoid style.

Alain Enthoven: Give McNamara a break.

Matthew Diller: Pataki imitates a mean landlord.

Chronicle B20

Bridge C17

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              132 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

29 Years Later, McNamara Is Given Warmer Welcome

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A;   Page 16;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 850 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., April 25


This time they came to listen, not to protest. And although some railed against
what they called the iniquities of Robert S. McNamara, who as Defense Secretary
was a major architect of Vietnam policy under Presidents John F. Kennedy and
Lyndon B. Johnson, it was a much warmer reception than he received the last time
he spoke at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

The year was 1966, the height of the Vietnam War. Mr. McNamara was at the
university to meet privately with students and faculty and discuss policy in
Indochina. Demonstrators threw themselves under his car, and the police led Mr.
McNamara away through steam tunnels linking university buildings.

But tonight a capacity crowd of more than 1,000 people listened as Mr. McNamara
discussed his best-selling confessional memoir, "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and
Lessons of Vietnam" (Times Books), with a panel of faculty members.

"We were wrong, terribly wrong," Mr. McNamara began, quoting from the book.

It was the same face with the same slicked-back hair that had presided over
endless televised briefings that confidently projected progress in Vietnam. But
now Mr. McNamara apologized. Most of the audience seemed prepared to forgive
him.

"You've got to give him a little credit for trying to understand what happened,"
said Tom Vallely, a former marine who directs Indochina programs at the
Institute for International Development at Harvard.

As a panelist, Mr. Vallely recalled for the audience that he was a 19-year-old
radio operator for his infantry company near Danang. "I could make night into
day" by calling in raids by B-52 bombers, Huey helicopter gunships or naval
bombardment, he said. "I could call anybody I wanted."

But, he added, "I couldn't call anybody to tell them we were wrong."

Part of the difference in the reception tonight was generational. Most of the
undergraduates had not been born when the last Americans wereremoved by
helicopter from Saigon 20 years ago this week.

At a dinner before the talk, the director of the Center for Science and
International Affairs at the Kennedy School, Prof. Graham Allison, told Mr.
McNamara, "One student said to me recently, 'What is all this passion about
Vietnam?' "

The student remarked that to him Vietnam was ancient history.

In 1966, when protesters shouted down Mr. McNamara, Professor Allison was a
graduate student who drove a decoy car trying unsuccessfully to fool
demonstrators into following him. Mr. McNamara's primary escort was another
graduate student, Barney Frank, now a Democratic Congressman from Massachusetts.

"I did a lousy job," Mr. Frank said in a telephone interview. "McNamara was
enormously gracious, considering I caused a major incident" by not taking better
precautions.

After their trip through the steam tunnels, Mr. Frank said, he walked the
Defense Secretary to his next appointment, the classroom of Prof. Henry A.
Kissinger.

The friendly tone expressed toward Mr. McNamara tonight by faculty members also
reflects genuine praise for the book, in contrast to the criticism it has
received from many reviewers, of both the old anti- and pro-Vietnam War
persuasions.

"On the whole it is an extraordinarily useful and wise book," said Ernest May, a
professor of history who teaches a class about America's role in Vietnam. "The
lessons are drawn," Professor May said. "I don't know of any other memoir that
is so forthright in its confession of error."

Professor May had one reservation. "There is a theology that is missing," he
said, explaining that the book does not fully capture the anti-Communist
imperative that drove policy makers in the cold war and led them into the
Vietnam quagmire. It is like "a crusader's memoir written by a man who can't
quite recall why he wants to capture Jerusalem," Professor May said.

There were protesters this evening, not students, but Vietnam veterans and
families of soldiers who died in Indochina.

"Your book and your presence is an obscenity," said John Hurley, a combat
veteran who is a lawyer here. "There are some indications you had doubts as
early as 1965!" Mr. Hurley shouted, demanding to know why Mr. McNamara did not
act to stop the war then.

As Mr. Hurley pressed on, saying Mr. McNamara never had to look a wounded
soldier in the face and tell him, "You have to die for geopolitical reasons," a
glint of the old Defense Secretary showed through. "Wait a minute," Mr. McNamara
said. "Shut up."

But Mr. McNamara was also contrite. Maureen Dunn, the wife of a Navy pilot,
Joseph P. Dunn, who was shot down over the Chinese island of Hainan, told Mr.
McNamara: "All these years, I've waited. I'd like someone to say to me, 'I'm
sorry.' "

Mrs. Dunn said she was especially distressed because she had recently received
classified documents that described a Cabinet meeting at which Mr. McNamara
spoke against trying to rescue her husband. Mr. McNamara had wanted to avoid
provoking China, Mrs. Dunn said.

Mr. McNamara said he did not remember the meeting. "But," he added, "if I said
it I'm not sorry. I'm horrified."

NAME: Robert S. McNamara

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert S. McNamara speaking at Harvard on Tuesday. (Keith
Meyers/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              133 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Combustible Rhetoric

SECTION: Section A;   Page 24;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 585 words


Much of the debate over President Clinton's warning against violent language has
focused on two connected questions. Was he unfairly linking mainstream
conservatives to the violent right? If so, did this amount to a tactical error
that lessened the political benefit of his steady performance during the
Oklahoma City tragedy?

But the President's tactics are less important than the substance of his
remarks. Mr. Clinton is right that the language of violence and conflict has
permeated political discussions, and that is nowhere more true than on talk
radio. The most extreme of these broadcast entertainers speak of "lynching"
political opponents. G. Gordon Liddy has introduced the crackpot notion that
citizens have the right to commit "self-defense" killing of Federal agents. More
polite hosts use less violent language, but they cast those who differ with them
not as political opponents but as satanic enemies bent on destroying American
society. Moreover, these invocations of violence and condemnation come in a
context in which the Government is cast as the enemy of the people.

A clear consequence of this virulent talk has been a greater harshness in both
political speech and the American social conscience. While it may be unfair to
single out individual broadcasters or politicians for directly motivating a
specific act of violence, the cumulative force of their words can create a
generalized atmosphere of violence in which unstable individuals feel they have
a license for crime. That is what the President was trying to say in Minnesota
on Monday, and he was right.

To cite a fairly recent example, George Wallace, Ross Barnett and Lester Maddox
were never known to have committed violent acts. But few Southern writers and
thinkers ever doubted that their exhortations to defy Federal law and their
castigations of the national Government and the civil rights movement created
the climate that produced a flurry of murders by gun and bomb. The lesson of
that era is clear. When leadership figures use violent language to warn of
apocalyptic developments, borderline personalities interpret this as permission
for violence.

The same kinds of paroxysms have occurred on the left. Millions of young
Americans marched peacefully against the Vietnam War. But the hysteria at the
fringes of their movement contributed to the paranoia and delusional anarchism
of the Weather Underground bombings.

So the civic task here is not to determine whether individual politicians or
broadcasters bear any kind of one-to-one responsibility. Rather the need is to
confront the reality that over the past few years the language of politics has
become infected with violent words and a mindset of animosity toward the
institutions of government. Bill Kristol, the Republican strategist, described
the consequence in common-sense language: "Sweeping denunciation of government
in a democracy where, after all, the people ultimately rule isn't a healthy
thing. And it's not healthy whether it comes from the left in the late 60's, or
from some on the extreme right in the early 90's."

The question of remedies is not easy. Clearly, any defender of the Constitution
has to come out on the side of freedom of speech, even if the speech continues
to be hateful. But a first step toward a healthier society would be for its most
virulent speakers to consider whether by characterizing politics as warfare and
by demonizing their opponents, they have created a hothouse where violence
blossoms.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              134 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 743 words



International A3-13

A MISSION OF HEALING IN HANOI
Three men whose lives tell the history of the Vietnam war came to Hanoi for the
20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon to try to make peace with Vietnam by
opening a clinic to help its children. A3

RWANDA PLANS MASSACRE INQUIRY
The Rwandan Government said it would organize an international inquiry into a
massacre of refugees but then began digging up the corpses, a move that drew
sharp criticism from the U.N. A12


ISRAEL EXPANDS IN EAST JERUSALEM
The Israeli Government plans to seize dozens of acres of Arab-owned land in East
Jerusalem for new Jewish neighborhoods and a police headquarters, officials
said. A5

Prosecutors have growing doubts in Italy's fight with the Mafia. A8

A White House official attacked what he sees as isolationism.  A12

Jerusalem Journal: A Cardinal's visit brings pain and anger. A4

National A14-27

INITIAL TRAIL OF EVIDENCE
Prosecutors in the Oklahoma bombing offered a glimpse of their case and
described how they came to suspect Timothy McVeigh.  A1

BOMBING UNBALANCES GUN LOBBY
House Republicans delayed a vote on whether to repeal a ban on assault weapons
for fear that the Oklahoma bombing would be linked to a need for gun control.
A1

U.S. SUES MICROSOFT
In a major setback for the Microsoft Corporation, the Justice Department sued on
antitrust grounds to block the company's $2 billion acquisition of Intuit Inc.,
which makes the leading personal finance software program. A1

THE SUPREMACY OF THE COURT
News Analysis: The decision that Congress could not ban gun possession near
schools was a reminder of the Supreme Court's power.  A1

GUILTY PLEA IN BANKRUPTCY
Orange County's former treasurer pleaded guilty to six felony counts, including
misappropriation, but will remain free as part of a plea bargain. Robert L.
Citron's use of derivatives led to $1.7 billion in losses and forced the big
California county into bankruptcy. A1

DAUGHTERS AT WORK, YEAR 3
More than six million girls nationwide participated in Take Your Daughter's To
Work Day, but a backlash is building.  A14

REVISING ENVIRONMENTAL RULES
The chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee abruptly approved Republican
legislation to roll back environmental regulations.  A16

A BIPARTISAN WELFARE PROPOSAL
The nation's governors have drafted a proposal to overhaul the welfare system,
urging the Senate to reject work requirements.  A22

Law A28

Pariah as client: Oklahoma bombing rekindles debate for lawyers.

Metro Digest B1

$31.1 BILLION BUDGET PROPOSED
Mayor Giuliani's proposed $31.1 billion budget includes the largest reduction in
spending since World War II, $1.1 billion in cuts that will squeeze city
services in ways that would affect most New Yorker. A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-34

Retro jukeboxes.  C1
Art auction preview.  C1 Mickey Spillane honored by mystery writers.  C30
For Children C23
Theater: "Indiscretions." C1
On Stage, and Off C2
"The Mountain Giants." C5
Film: "Destiny Turns On the Radio." C8
"Village of the Damned." C8
"The Underneath." C12
"Search and Destroy." C16
"Picture Bride." C16
"Top Dog." C16
"A Pyromaniac's Love Story." C18
"True Believers." C18
Music: Nicolai's "Wives." C5
Liz Phair at Town Hall.  C28
Dance: Miami City Ballet.  C4
Restaurants C26
Art: "Women Photographers of the Weimar Republic." C28
"Philip Guston: The 50's." C32
Matthew Barney in two media.  C34
Art in Review C34
Books: "The Rainmaker," by John Grisham.  C33
Television: TV Weekend D18
Home Video D19

Sports B7-14

Baseball: Mets relief failing.  B7
McDowell wants to go 9.  B9
Cubs overcome reversal of ump's call.  B11
Basketball: Knicks win playoff opener easily.  B7
The Jordan factor.  B13
Columns: Vecsey on Knicks.  B7
Hockey: Rangers' starting goalie question.  B14
Yacht Racing: Speed game.  B12

Obituaries A30-31

Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33

Editorials

Mr. Deutch's message.
A step forward for city budget.
Mr. Clinton bows to farmers.
Time for truth in Argentina.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Back to the future?
A. M. Rosenthal: Clinton does his duty.
Charles E. Schumer: Life and liberty.
Elizabeth Becker: A U.N. success story.

Chronicle B2

Crossword C30

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              135 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 48 words


"When the army sent me to Vietnam, they told me I was fighting for the people of
Vietnam. Now, at last, it's true. Now I really am fighting for these people."
JEFFREY FREDRICK, a 45-year-old veteran who lost his leg in the war, and is now
working in a clinic in Hanoi. [A3:]

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              136 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

20 Years After War, 3 in Hanoi on Healing Mission

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1061 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 25


They are all survivors of the war, these three Americans whose lives tell the
history of their country's ordeal in Vietnam.

They gathered in a newly whitewashed ward of an otherwise decrepit children's
hospital: a decorated veteran whose leg was blown off in a Vietnamese rice paddy
in 1968; a doctor who in 1971 announced that he would refuse to fight in
Vietnam, a declaration that could have landed him in prison, and a
Vietnamese-born engineer, who was only a boy of 7 on that fateful night 20 years
ago this week when American evacuation helicopters carried the rest of his
family away from Saigon, and left him behind.

All three were here -- on the 20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon and the end
of the war -- to try to make peace with Vietnam by healing its children.

"When the Army sent me to Vietnam, they told me I was fighting for the people of
Vietnam," said Jeffrey Fredrick, 45, the veteran from Tallahassee, Fla., who
lost his right leg to a Vietcong booby trap in Cu Chi Province. "Now, at last,
it's true. Now I really am fighting for these people."

With $1.3 million from the United States Government through the Agency for
International Development and $300,000 from the Vietnam Veterans of America
Foundation, Mr. Fredrick and an American team are opening a clinic to supply
state-of-the-art plastic braces to help handicapped Vietnamese children to walk.

The opening ceremony at the clinic will be held Saturday, the eve of the
anniversary of the end of the war.

It was Mr. Fredrick who recruited the others: Dr. Jeffrey H. Garrison, 51, a
rehabilitative-medicine specialist from St. Petersburg, Fla., who during the war
declared himself a conscientious objector and refused to fight, and Quan Pham,
the 27-year-old Vietnamese-American technician who was abandoned by his family
in Saigon on April 29, 1975.

Mr. Pham was left behind when his father, a pilot with the South Vietnamese Air
Force, fled with his wife and his three other children aboard one of the last
American evacuation helicopters fleeing Tan Son Nhut Air Base, on the outskirts
of Saigon.

Mr. Pham, who was then staying with his grandmother elsewhere in the city, spent
the next six years as a child laborer in Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City. "I hauled
ice, I hauled coal, I chopped wood," he recalled.

"When my family was evacuated, I was so young then that I didn't understand what
was happening," he said. "I just remember that I was very confused."

He did not see his parents again until 1981, when he was allowed by the
Vietnamese Government to leave Vietnam to join them in Florida, where today they
own a dry-cleaning business.

"Coming back to Vietnam was my idea," said Mr. Pham, who had worked with Mr.
Fredrick in his orthopedic clinic in Tallahassee. While his father remains a
staunch anti-Communist and was wary of his son returning to the former enemy
capital, Hanoi, "my parents still wanted me to come back and do something for
Vietnam," he said.

Mr. Pham interrupted the conversation to help a group of hospital workers tear
off the packing material from some of the newly imported equipment for the
clinic, including an infrared oven that will be used to bake flesh-colored
plastic into leg braces.

The braces will be molded individually from the legs of Vietnamese children who
cannot walk, or cannot walk normally, because of birth defects and disease. The
clinic is expected to care for at least 1,000 children a year who, until now,
could have hoped only for crude leg braces made of bamboo.

Dr. Garrison, the team's physician, felt that the time was finally right for him
to come to Vietnam, 24 years after he informed his draft board in Peekskill,
N.Y., that he would refuse to fight in the war.

Dr. Garrison, a Quaker, said his religious principles barred him from fighting
in any war -- an explanation that was eventually accepted by the draft board.

"And even if you believed that war was a justifiable behavior -- and I don't --
the Vietnam War really seemed to be trumped up," Dr. Garrison, 51, said. "Now I
believe that there is a moral obligation to help the recovery of this country."

Meeting for the first time with his patients this week, Dr. Garrison saw what
had become of Vietnam two decades after the war. In one of the poorest countries
on earth, his tiny patients entered the examination room wearing little but
soiled rags, their misshaped bodies often a testament to poor nutrition and to
diseases, including polio, that have been eradicated from the developed world.

Other children, he said, suffer from birth defects that could be a result of
their mothers' poor nutrition during pregnancy.

One young mother carried a year-old boy who suffered from cerebral palsy, his
ears misshapen and his back so extended that it seemed the muscles might tear.
"He cannot even recognize me," the frightened mother told Dr. Garrison, asking
for some sort of help that might allow the boy just to crawl.

Dr. Garrison tried to comfort the woman, saying that eventually the clinic might
be able to help the boy with braces for his deformed legs. But privately he told
visitors, "I don't know that this boy will live."

It is difficult to tell that Mr. Fredrick, the clinic director, is an amputee.
He walks with only the slightest hitch in his stride.

"The idea of having all these kids walk with a brace and play in a playground is
unrealistic," said Mr. Fredrick, who turned the lessons learned from his
affliction into a life's career -- he now runs clinics for the manufacture of
orthopedic devices. "But we want to do everything that it takes to rehabilitate
as many as we can."

Mr. Fredrick said that he felt no bitterness toward the Vietnamese over the loss
of his leg, insisting that he was in fact lucky.

"It's amazing that I didn't lose both legs," he said of the searing blast from
the booby trap in 1968. "A whole lot of other people have reason to be bitter
about the war -- and they're the people of Vietnam."

He said he resented the American veterans who use the war "as an excuse,"
adding, "Vietnam has become an across-the-board excuse for a whole generation of
guys who messed up their lives."

"Compare our trauma to the trauma of these little kids," he said, nodding to a
dank hallway filled with anxious Vietnamese parents cradling their handicapped
children. "Now that -- that's trauma."


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Parents and others crowded the hallway of a children's clinic in
Hanoi, waiting to be seen. Jeffrey Fredrick, center with briefcase, and two
other survivors of the war are trying to make peace with Vietnam by healing its
children. "Now I really am fighting for these people," Mr. Fredrick said. (Lois
Raimondo for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              137 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: AT FORT RILEY;
Proud Base Faced With Notoriety by Association

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: JUNCTION CITY, Kan., April 27


Young soldiers in this military town in the Kansas Flint Hills have heard the
stories about how the older guys were sometimes called "baby killer" when they
returned from Vietnam.

But nothing like that ever happened to any of them until last week, when Timothy
J. McVeigh, a former soldier who had once been stationed at nearby Fort Riley,
was held in the Oklahoma City bombing and Terry L. Nichols, another former G.I.,
was linked to the investigation.

"Now a lot of people seem to be blaming all of us because of a couple of fools,"
said Sgt. Chris Killerbrew. "That's not right."

In the last few days, said Sergeant Killerbrew, he and some of his comrades have
experienced embarrassment and finger pointing, not unlike the things that many
Muslims went through in the first days after the bombing, when the suspects were
described as "Middle Eastern-looking" before the sandy-haired and blue-eyed Mr.
McVeigh was charged.

Sergeant Killerbrew and his family were in Oklahoma City three days after the
bombing. They were in a store and asked a clerk if she would cash an out-of-town
check. Sure, she said, where are you from?

"Junction City, Kansas."

"Junction City, that's where those bombers, those baby killers are from," said a
man standing behind them in line. "Why don't you go back to where you belong?"

The sergeant turned around and told the man through clenched teeth why his
family was in Oklahoma: his 3-year-old niece, Kayla Titsworth, had been killed
in the blast.

Junction City, 270 miles north of Oklahoma City, is next door to Fort Riley, a
101,000-acre military base founded in 1853 and the home of the Army's First
Infantry Division, the glory-drenched Big Red One. Troops from the division were
among the first to land on Omaha Beach in Normandy in World War II, and among
the first to fight in the jungles of Vietnam and the deserts of Iraq.

For many soldiers here, past and present, the charges against Mr. McVeigh, a
decorated veteran of the Persian Gulf war, has wounded their pride and shaken
their morale.

Every time they turn on the television they see a picture of their base and
another story about terror in the heartland. The bombing case has led Federal
agents to Fort Riley, where investigators are trying to question a number of Mr.
McVeigh's former comrades.

"What we want to tell folks around the country is that there is more to us than
the current situation," said Maj. Ben Santos, a Fort Riley spokesman.

Mr. McVeigh has not entered a plea yet in the bombing case, but many soldiers
here take his guilt as a given. Standing in a cold rain in his field uniform,
Cpl. Perez Blackmon said many on the post felt betrayed and angry that "one of
our own could have done something like this."

"This uniform means pride, the highest state of honor," Corporal Blackmon
continued. "It gets no better than this, and he disgraced it."

A 28-year-old soldier, who would not give his name because the troops have been
ordered not to talk to the press, said his comrades were just ordinary people.
"The military teaches you a lot of skills, but blowing up a bunch of kids ain't
one of them," he said.

His friend Chuck Werts, 24, who left the Army after a three-year hitch, said the
emergence of a Gulf war veteran as the prime suspect in the bombing "has pulled
the guys together a little more."

"But it also makes you look at your buddies more," the soldier said, shaking his
head. "Your buddy might be your enemy. You just don't know anymore."

Nearly 15,000 soldiers are assigned to Fort Riley. Mr. McVeigh was one of them
until 1992, when he was honorably discharged. Now he haunts both the post and
the town.

Before the bombing, he was reportedly seen on the streets and in the bars,
gasoline stations and motels of Junction City, often with a dark-haired man
known only as John Doe No. 2, the subject of a nationwide manhunt.

Both men are believed to have rented the truck used in the bombing from a Ryder
truck rental outlet, Elliott's Body Shop, on the outskirts of town.

"I feel like this whole mess is giving the military and Junction City a bad
name," said Reedy Garland, a 24-year-old parks worker here who served three
years in the Army at Fort Riley.

Scott Sanders, a 34-year-old parks worker, agreed. "It's making us all look
bad," he said, "like this is some center to train terrorists."

Junction City, called J. C. by the locals, is a town of 21,000 people, many of
them former soldiers who decided to stay because it has been a relatively safe
place to rear their children and nurture middle-class dreams. A $50,000 house
there, one retired soldier said, would cost him at least three times that amount
in his native Los Angeles.

But the town is crowded with bars, mobile home parks, rowdy soldiers, used car
lots, fast-food restaurants and places where you can rent furniture in one aisle
and X-rated videos in another. In the last year or so a murder-suicide occurred
at Fort Riley, and last March there was a double slaying during a robbery of a
pizza parlor in town.

"It's still a good, friendly, family town," said Clarence Thomas, a 39-year-old
parks superintendent who was stationed at Fort Riley until he left the Army in
1980. "I'm from Los Angeles, and staying here was the lesser of two evils by
far."

He was supervising a crew planting a new tree in a downtown park where the
city's Vietnam War memorial is situated. Of the five workers, four had been
assigned to Fort Riley before leaving the Army.

"I wouldn't move anywhere else," Mr. Thomas said. "This McVeigh guy didn't stay
and live here. He wasn't one of us."


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cpl. Perez Blackmon, a soldier in Junction City, Kan., said
many on the post felt betrayed by the bombing; "What we want to tell folks
around the country is that there is more to us than the current situation," said
Maj. Ben Santos in Fort Riley. (Photographs by Charlie Riedel for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              138 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV WEEKEND;
Saigon in the Final Hours Before the Surrender

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section D;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


"The Fall of Saigon" is a vivid, exciting, painful account of the final hours
before the unconditional surrender of South Vietnam, 20 years ago this weekend.
Meshing newsreel clips with first-person accounts, the two-hour documentary
brings back the desperate efforts to save the Vietnamese who had worked with the
United States and still trusted their allies not to desert them. The overriding
feeling is one of shame over the many who were left behind to the mercies of the
triumphant Communists. A former Central Intelligence Agency man says, "I
couldn't look into their eyes."

Most of these two hours is focused on the American Embassy, into which South
Vietnamese flocked in hopes of refuge and escape as North Vietnamese troops
converged on their city. What one official calls "a daisy chain of helicopters"
carried thousands from the embassy rooftop to waiting aircraft carriers. As
depicted tonight, it was a heroic achievement. But errors were made and time ran
out; hundreds had to be left behind. Many more Vietnamese remained in the city,
waiting for promised pick-ups that never came.

Scenes of panic on the streets -- looting, South Vietnamese soldiers shedding
their uniforms and throwing away their weapons, people running every which way
to escape the inevitable -- are effectively juxtaposed with the high-pressure
orderliness of the exodus by helicopter.

No comment is made here on the larger issue of responsibility for the war
itself, lately reawakened by Robert S. McNamara's apologia. Gerald R. Ford, the
President at the time, and Henry A. Kissinger, who was both Secretary of State
and National Security Adviser, express their regrets. "For me a great emptiness,
a great sadness," says Mr. Kissinger. But far more affecting are the words of
one of the last few exhausted marines to be carried off in the last helicopter:
"Most of us were crying."

'Martin's Lament'
'Religion and Race
in America'

PBS, tonight at 10
(Channel 13 in New York)

Can America's black and white Christians worship together, as the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.  envisioned? That is the significant question addressed
with more earnestness than inspiration by "Martin's Lament: Religion and Race in
America." In visits to two churches in Indianapolis, one mostly black, one
mostly white, pastors and congregants talk about the difficulty of meeting the
needs of people with different traditions.

The burden, all agree, is on whites not just to allow blacks to sit alongside
them of a Sunday morning, but also to change church practices to make minorities
truly welcome. Members of a small interracial Roman Catholic congregation tell
of the satisfactions of mixing cultural traditions. Full Sunday morning
integration, a few of those interviewed say, means moving away from the images
of Jesus as a white male (a professor at the Howard University School of
Divinity announces that Jesus was definitely black) and joining in efforts
toward economic and political equality.

Now and then the program comes to life, but the slow motion, the relentless
church music and the repetition of fairly simple ideas can act as a soporific.
Just like some Sunday services.

'Newt Gingrich and the Republican Revolution'
A&E, tonight at 9

Politics, not policy, is the subject of this brisk two-hour review of the first
100 days of the Republican-controlled Congress. It is a mostly familiar but
tidily packaged account of how Newt Gingrich got to be the first Republican
Speaker of the House in 40 years and about what he has been up to since. The
energetic and combative Mr. Gingrich is described as combining a distaste for
the spirit of the 1960's with a hankering after some Newt-age future.

The program does a little score-keeping, but offers no evaluation of the famous
Contract With America as bills reach the Senate and White House. Among the many
Capitol players on camera in brief snatches are Mr. Gingrich himself and such
allies as Representative Henry J. Hyde, now head of the House Judiciary
Committee, and adversaries like Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the Minority
leader. You can also hear from Mr. Gingrich's biographer, Jeff Kamen, who seems
to be under the impression that his subject is a mixture of the better parts of
St. Paul and Paul Bunyan.

THE FALL OF SAIGON
Discovery Channel, tonight at 9 and midnight

Directed and produced by Michael Dutfield; produced by George Carey; Diane
Tucker, assistant producer; Phil McDonald, film editor; Allan E. Goodman,
historical consultant; Steve Bergson, film research. A Barraclough Carey
Production for Discovery. For Discovery: Anne Hubbel Lustig, coordinating
producer; Joyce Shelton, production manager; Nancy LeBrun, executive producer;
Clark Bunting, executive in charge of production. Garrick Utley, narrator.

WITH: President Gerald R. Ford, Henry A. Kissinger, Wolf Lehmann, Frank Snepp,
John Madison, Stuart Herrington, James Kean, Ken Moorefield, Homer Smith,
Richard Carey, George McArthur, Peter Arnett, Kim Vinh Luong, Dam Pham, Tran Van
Tra, Nguyen Thanh Trung and Pham Xuan The.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              139 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Corliss Lamont Dies at 93; Socialist Battled McCarthy

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1388 words


Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and humanist philosopher who
battled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the C.I.A. and other icons of authority in a
lifelong fight for civil liberties and international understanding, died on
Wednesday at his country home in Ossining, N.Y. He was 93 years old and lived in
New York City.

Dr. Lamont died of heart failure, his family said.

Born into wealth, the scion of the chairman of J. P. Morgan & Company, Dr.
Lamont grew up with privilege, attended Phillips Exeter Academy and Harvard
University like his father and might have had the life of a patrician on Wall
Street. Instead, he cast his lot into the arena of radical causes.

In a career that spanned much of the century, Dr. Lamont wrote 16 books and
hundreds of pamphlets on subjects ranging from humanism to McCarthyism; taught
at Harvard, Cornell, Columbia and other universities; campaigned for
Soviet-American friendship, and weathered false accusations of Communist
affiliations.

He also served as a director of the American Civil Liberties Union for 22 years,
was chairman of the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee for 30 years,
won court fights against censure by Senator McCarthy and mail censorship by the
Central Intelligence Agency, ran twice for the United States Senate, opposed the
Vietnam War and championed the Bill of Rights in countless forums.

"My final word is that in the battles that confront us today for America's
freedom and welfare, our chief aim as public-spirited citizens must be neither
to avoid trouble, nor to stay out of jail, nor even to preserve our lives, but
to keep on fighting for our fundamental principals and ideals," Dr. Lamont
concluded in his memoirs, "Yes to Life," published by Horizon Press in 1981.

A descendent of men who fought in the American Revolution and the son of Thomas
William Lamont, the partner of J. P. Morgan, Dr. Lamont first became a rebel at
Harvard in the early 1920's, attacking university clubs as snobbish. Later as a
young philosophy instructor at Columbia, he organized aid for Harvard scrubwomen
dismissed in a dispute over a new minimum-wage law.

He swung further to the left in the 1930's as he studied the causes of the Great
Depression, wrote a book on the Soviet Union, became head of the National
Council of American-Soviet Friendship and returned from visits to the Soviet
Union with high praise. "The people are better dressed, food is good and
plentiful, everyone seems confident, happy and full of spirit," he said.

He later became more critical of Soviet failures -- deploring its treatment of
political opponents as mentally ill, for example, and condemning the denial of
free speech and other basic human rights -- though he insisted that a nation
transformed from feudalism to superpower in a few decades could not be expected
immediately to develop democratic institutions like those in the West.

Critics later said he had been oversold on Stalinism and they attacked him as
hopelessly naive as he continued to promote Soviet-American friendship long
after the Cold War had made it a myth. And his espousal of these themes -- and
of organizations supporting them -- made him an obvious target of redbaiters on
Capitol Hill in the 1950's.

Subpoenaed by Senator McCarthy, the Wisconsin Republican, in 1953, Dr. Lamont
did not invoke a Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination. Instead
he testified that he was not -- and had never been -- a Communist, but he
refused to answer other questions about his political beliefs and associations,
citing First Amendment freedoms due a private citizen.

He was cited for contempt of Congress and fought back in Federal court. The
District Court dismissed the charge and a Circuit Court unanimously upheld the
dismissal in 1955. The Government did not appeal to the Supreme Court. While the
case turned on the Senator's authority and not First Amendment rights, Dr.
Lamont and his supporters regarded it as a major victory of his career.

Dr. Lamont, who had been a director of the American Civil Liberties Union since
1932 and had long resisted efforts to oust Communists from the organization's
board and staff, resigned in 1954, in part because the board was slow coming to
his defense against Senator McCarthy. He then helped to found the National
Emergency Civil Liberties Committee, which was non-Communist but eager to fight
for the rights of Communists.

Dr. Lamont ran for the Senate on the American Labor Party ticket in 1952 and
received 10,000 votes. Six years later, he tried again on the Independent
Socialist line and got 49,000 votes.

In the late 1950's, Dr. Lamont won a case against the State Department, which
had refused for nearly a decade to issue him a passport on the ground that his
travel abroad "would be contrary to the best interests of the United States."

In another court victory, Dr. Lamont won a suit in 1965 against the United
States Postmaster General for violating his First Amendment rights by opening
and withholding his mail, including propaganda from Peking. The Supreme Court
held a 1961 anti-propaganda mail law to be unconstitutional.

Also in 1965, Dr. Lamont won a lawsuit against the C.I.A., which had opened
scores of letters mailed or received by him, including some from his wife. A
Federal Court declared that "illegal prying into the shared intimacies of
husband and wife is despicable."

Throughout his pageant of political and social activities, Dr. Lamont continued
to write, producing books on humanist philosophy, the Soviet Union, civil
liberties issues and other topics, including intimate portraits of the British
poet laureate John Masefield, the educator John Dewey, the philosopher Bertrand
Russell and others he had known.

He also wrote hundreds of pamphlets and thousands of letters to newspapers and
acquaintances on a host of subjects -- opposing nuclear testing, the Vietnam
War, the convictions of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, arguing strenuously for
human and civil rights, international understanding and above all, peace. Dr.
Lamont often made taped transcripts of conversations with friends and appeared
frequently on radio, television and other forums.

At the same time, he continued to teach, mostly at Columbia, but also at
Harvard, Cornell and the New School for Social Research. In 1974, he was honored
by Columbia for establishing major literary research collections at the school,
including writings by George Santayana and Mr. Masefield and art by Rockwell
Kent. In 1982, Dr. Lamont gave $1 million to Columbia's law school for a chair
in civil liberties.

Dr. Lamont, who was president of the American Humanist Association for many
years, said his fusion of militancy and philosophy was based on humanist
principles -- "not Christian service to an improbable God, but service here and
now to our fellow human beings."

He said the humanist uses intelligence and the scientific method to solve
problems. "Reserving the word 'love' for his family and friends, the humanist
takes an attitude of compassionate concern toward his fellow human beings in
general," he said.

Dr. Lamont's 1949 book, "The Philosophy of Humanism," is a standard text on the
subject. His other books include "The Illusion of Immortality," (1935) and "The
Peoples of the Soviet Union" (1946).

Corliss Lamont was born on May 28, 1902, in Englewood, N.J., and grew up near
the summit of the Palisades overlooking the Hudson River and Manhattan. He
graduated from Phillips Exeter in 1920 and from Harvard in 1924 with a
bachelor's degree and high honors. After a year at Oxford University, he became
a philosophy lecturer at Columbia and in 1932 earned a doctor of philosophy
degree there.

Dr. Lamont's 1928 marriage to Margaret Hayes Irish, a writer and researcher who
was co-author of his first book on the Soviet Union, "Russia Day by Day" (1933),
ended in divorce. His second wife, Helen Lamb, whom he married in 1962, died in
1975. His third wife, Beth Keehner, whom he married in 1986, survives him.

Dr. Lamont is also survived by a son, Hayes, of Newton, Mass.; three daughters,
Margot Heap of Greenwich, Conn., Florence Antonides of Avon, Conn., and Anne
Jafferis of New Haven; six grandchildren and one great-grandchild; 14
step-children of his last two marriages and 50 step-grandchildren.


NAME: Corliss Lamont

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Corliss Lamont. (1982)

TYPE: BiographyObituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              140 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 28, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Corliss Lamont Dies at 93; Socialist Battled McCarthy

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1397 words


Corliss Lamont, the Socialist author, teacher and humanist philosopher who
battled Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, the C.I.A. and other icons of authority in a
lifelong fight for civil liberties and international understanding, died on
Wednesday at his country home in Ossining, N.Y. He was 93 years old and lived in
New York City.

Dr. Lamont died of heart failure, his family said.

Born into wealth, the scion of the chairman of J. P. Morgan & Company, Dr.
Lamont grew up with privilege, attended Phillips Exeter Academy and Harvard
University like his father and might have had the life of a patrician on Wall
Street. Instead, he cast his lot into the arena of radical causes.

In a career that spanned much of the century, Dr. Lamont wrote 16 books and
hundreds of pamphlets on subjects ranging from humanism to McCarthyism; taught
at Harvard, Cornell, Columbia and other universities; campaigned for
Soviet-American friendship, and weathered false accusations of Communist
affiliations.

He also served as a director of the American Civil Liberties Union for 22 years,
was chairman of the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee for 30 years,
won court fights against censure by Senator McCarthy and mail censorship by the
Central Intelligence Agency, ran twice for the United States Senate, opposed the
Vietnam War and championed the Bill of Rights in countless forums.

"My final word is that in the battles that confront us today for America's
freedom and welfare, our chief aim as public-spirited citizens must be neither
to avoid trouble, nor to stay out of jail, nor even to preserve our lives, but
to keep on fighting for our fundamental principals and ideals," Dr. Lamont
concluded in his memoirs, "Yes to Life," published by Horizon Press in 1981.

A descendent of men who fought in the American Revolution and the son of Thomas
William Lamont, the partner of J. P. Morgan, Dr. Lamont first became a rebel at
Harvard in the early 1920's, attacking university clubs as snobbish. Later as a
young philosophy instructor at Columbia, he organized aid for Harvard scrubwomen
dismissed in a dispute over a new minimum-wage law.

He swung further to the left in the 1930's as he studied the causes of the Great
Depression, wrote a book on the Soviet Union, became head of the National
Council of American-Soviet Friendship and returned from visits to the Soviet
Union with high praise. "The people are better dressed, food is good and
plentiful, everyone seems confident, happy and full of spirit," he said.

He later became more critical of Soviet failures -- deploring its treatment of
political opponents as mentally ill, for example, and condemning the denial of
free speech and other basic human rights -- though he insisted that a nation
transformed from feudalism to superpower in a few decades could not be expected
immediately to develop democratic institutions like those in the West.

Critics later said he had been oversold on Stalinism and they attacked him as
hopelessly naive as he continued to promote Soviet-American friendship long
after the Cold War had made it a myth. And his espousal of these themes -- and
of organizations supporting them -- made him an obvious target of redbaiters on
Capitol Hill in the 1950's.

Subpoenaed by Senator McCarthy, the Wisconsin Republican, in 1953, Dr. Lamont
did not invoke a Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination. Instead
he testified that he was not -- and had never been -- a Communist, but he
refused to answer other questions about his political beliefs and associations,
citing First Amendment freedoms due a private citizen.

He was cited for contempt of Congress and fought back in Federal court. The
District Court dismissed the charge and a Circuit Court unanimously upheld the
dismissal in 1955. The Government did not appeal to the Supreme Court. While the
case turned on the Senator's authority and not First Amendment rights, Dr.
Lamont and his supporters regarded it as a major victory of his career.

Dr. Lamont, who had been a director of the American Civil Liberties Union since
1932 and had long resisted efforts to oust Communists from the organization's
board and staff, resigned in 1954, in part because the board was slow coming to
his defense against Senator McCarthy. He then helped to found the National
Emergency Civil Liberties Committee, which was non-Communist but eager to fight
for the rights of Communists.

Dr. Lamont ran for the Senate on the American Labor Party ticket in 1952 and
received 10,000 votes. Six years later, he tried again on the Independent
Socialist line and got 49,000 votes.

In the late 1950's, Dr. Lamont won a case against the State Department, which
had refused for nearly a decade to issue him a passport on the ground that his
travel abroad "would be contrary to the best interests of the United States."

In another court victory, Dr. Lamont won a suit in 1965 against the United
States Postmaster General for violating his First Amendment rights by opening
and withholding his mail, including propaganda from Peking. The Supreme Court
held a 1961 anti-propaganda mail law to be unconstitutional.

Also in 1965, Dr. Lamont won a lawsuit against the C.I.A., which had opened
scores of letters mailed or received by him, including some from his wife. A
Federal Court declared that "illegal prying into the shared intimacies of
husband and wife is despicable."

Throughout his pageant of political and social activities, Dr. Lamont continued
to write, producing books on humanist philosophy, the Soviet Union, civil
liberties issues and other topics, including intimate portraits of the British
poet laureate John Masefield, the educator John Dewey, the philosopher Bertrand
Russell and others he had known.

He also wrote hundreds of pamphlets and thousands of letters to newspapers and
acquaintances on a host of subjects -- opposing nuclear testing, the Vietnam
War, the convictions of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, arguing strenuously for
human and civil rights, international understanding and above all, peace. Dr.
Lamont often made taped transcripts of conversations with friends and appeared
frequently on radio, television and other forums.

At the same time, he continued to teach, mostly at Columbia, but also at
Harvard, Cornell and the New School for Social Research. In 1974, he was honored
by Columbia for establishing major literary research collections at the school,
including writings by George Santayana and Mr. Masefield and art by Rockwell
Kent. In 1982, Dr. Lamont gave $1 million to Columbia's law school for a chair
in civil liberties.

Dr. Lamont, who was president of the American Humanist Association for many
years, said his fusion of militancy and philosophy was based on humanist
principles -- "not Christian service to an improbable God, but service here and
now to our fellow human beings."

He said the humanist uses intelligence and the scientific method to solve
problems. "Reserving the word 'love' for his family and friends, the humanist
takes an attitude of compassionate concern toward his fellow human beings in
general," he said.

Dr. Lamont's 1949 book, "The Philosophy of Humanism," is a standard text on the
subject. His other books include "The Illusion of Immortality," (1935) and "The
Peoples of the Soviet Union" (1946).

Corliss Lamont was born on May 28, 1902, in Englewood, N.J., and grew up near
the summit of the Palisades overlooking the Hudson River and Manhattan. He
graduated from Phillips Exeter in 1920 and from Harvard in 1924 with a
bachelor's degree and high honors. After a year at Oxford University, he became
a philosophy lecturer at Columbia and in 1932 earned a doctor of philosophy
degree there.

Dr. Lamont's 1928 marriage to Margaret Hayes Irish, a writer and researcher who
was co-author of his first book on the Soviet Union, "Russia Day by Day" (1933),
ended in divorce. His second wife, Helen Lamb, whom he married in 1962, died in
1975. His third wife, Beth Keehner, whom he married in 1986, survives him.

Dr. Lamont is also survived by a son, Hayes, of Newton, Mass.; three daughters,
Margot Heap of Greenwich, Conn., Florence Antonides of Avon, Conn., and Anne
Jafferis of New Haven; six grandchildren and one great-grandchild; 14
step-children of his last two marriages and 50 step-grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 16, 1995, Tuesday

 CORRECTION:
An obituary on April 28 about Cor liss Lamont, the Socialist author and crusader
for civil liberties, misstat ed his birth date and the number of votes he
received in the 1952 Senate race. Mr. Lamont was born on March 28, 1902, not May
28. Running on the American Labor Party ticket, he won 104,702 votes, not
10,000.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Corliss Lamont. (1982)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              141 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 768 words



International 3-7

PEACE IN EL SALVADOR

Barely three years after United Nations mediators brokered a settlement to end a
conflict that killed at least 75,000 people, El Salvador has been transformed by
peace. 1

SOUTH KOREA GAS BLAST

Rescuers worked into the night to search for survivors of a gas explosion that
killed at least 100, more than half of them teen-agers, in Taegu, South Korea. 3


ARMY LINK TO JAPANESE SECT

The Japanese Army acknowledged that two of its sergeants were secret members of
the sect suspected in the nerve gas attack last month on the Tokyo subway
system. 3

PARADE PROTOCOL IN MOSCOW

After much debate about symbolism, Russia's President has decided to stand atop
Lenin's Mausoleum to review a May 9 parade of World War II veterans. 5

ISRAELI ARMY'S ORDERS

The senior Israeli Army commander in the occupied West Bank said that his
soldiers must kill wanted Palestinian militants. 6

CONCERNS ABOUT RUSSIA-IRAN DEAL

U.S. officials said that a top Russian official promised in January to sell
equipment to Iran that would enable it to prepare material suitable for an
atomic bomb. 6

FRANCE LOOSENS ALGERIA TIE

France is planning to reduce a package of loans and easy credit that has propped
up the stagnant Algerian economy for years, a French newspaper reported. 6

Terrorist attacks dropped but casualties rose. 6

In Bogota, a distinctly different kind of mayor. 7

Argentine bishop condemns the church's role in "dirty war." 6

Kamp-Lintfort Journal: Coal miners with their backs to the wall. 4

National 8-12

U.S. ECONOMY SLOWS

The economy showed to a 2.8 percent growth pace in the first quarter of 1995,
the Government said.  1

QUESTIONS ABOUT BOMB SUSPECT

A week after Federal agents found Timothy McVeigh in a jail, questions about him
and the Oklahoma City bombing continue to grow.  1

TEACHING TERROR

Training manuals distributed by rightist paramilitary groups outline the means
for waging a campaign of terror and guerrilla war.  10

TROUBLE FOR DEMOCRATS

For the first time since Reconstruction, Democrats may lose their grip on
Louisiana, reflecting an ominous trend for them in the South. 1

REPUBLICAN GAINS

The Republican Party's long effort to forge a nationwide network of small donors
paid substantial dividends in 1994, studies show.  8

SIMPSON WITNESS ASKS OUT

A potential defense witness said he did not want to testify at the Simpson trial
because of lawyer tactics and a circuslike atmosphere. 9

MORMONS AND JEWISH BAPTISMS

Mormon authorities said they would reissue an order prohibiting church members
from including Jewish Holocaust victims in retroactive baptismal ceremonies.  9

MEGACHURCHES' INFLUENCE

Megachurches are profoundly changing how many of the nation's 80 million
Protestants worship.  12

Beliefs: A scholar of religious-liberty issues looks back at Waco. 9

Metro Digest 25

WELFARE EXODUS POSSIBLE

City and state efforts to cut benefits may prompt welfare recipients to move out
of New York State, Mayor Giuliani said, adding that for recipients, a break from
dependency on government benefits would be "a good thing." 1

Business Digest 35

Arts/Entertainment 13-19, 49

Networks and studios rush to edit out bomb plots.  13

Music: Opera Ebony's "Outcast." 13

A rock coalition of post-punk and grunge.  13

Boukman Eksperyans, from Haiti.  14

Dance: Eclecticism at Ballet Theater.  14

A bill of versatility.  19

Television: "Buffalo Girls." 49

Sports 30-34

Baseball: The Mets' welcome.  31

Mattingly and McDowell star.  31

Ontario bars use of replacement umpires.  31

Big money in arbitration.  33

Basketball: Jordan leads Bulls.  31

The Knicks' challenge.  34

Column: Araton on baseball.  31

Football: Kotite's first look.  33

Hockey: Isles jar Rangers.  31

Obituaries 29

Edgar Johnson, biographer.

Alexander Knox, actor and playwright.

Gaston J. Sigur Jr., Asian affairs aide in the Reagan Administration.

Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23

Editorials

The high court loses restraint.

Pssst! Want to buy a reservoir?

Susanna Rodell: Daughters' day.

Letters

Russell Baker: Spoilers of the day.

Bob Herbert: Backing off bravery.

Peter Ross Range: A business-hungry Vietnam forgets . . .

Philip Gourevitch: . . . but it does not forgive.

Chronicle 24

Bridge 17

Crossword 12

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              142 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

When Holocaust Lives With Parents

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 27;   Column 3;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words


Though Margaret and Armin Krauss appeared to live the middle-class apotheosis in
Whitestone, Queens, the Holocaust was a cloud over their home. For most of their
43-year marriage, Mrs. Krauss, who survived Auschwitz, and Mr. Krauss, who
survived Dachau, never even mentioned the Holocaust. Mrs. Krauss lived on a
nervous edge, plagued by waves of nightmares. Their son Jeffrey sought answers,
and counseling.

The Krauss family is not unusual, psychologists say. The children of survivors
often need to sort out their experiences about growing up in America under the
specter of the Holocaust. Some children shudder over their parents' agitation at
a sudden siren, or even a creaking floor. Some are haunted at being named for
dead brothers and sisters.

Indeed, there is a growing interest in helping children cope with their parents'
long-suppressed traumas. One major program, at Mount Sinai Medical Center in
Manhattan, counsels survivors and their children, as well as doing biological
research into the trauma that has affected them.

Mrs. Krauss, for example, was found to be one of 200 survivors in the study
suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, according to Dr. Rachel Yehuda,
the neuroscientist who heads the program. The disorder, whose symptoms include
sleeplessness, hypersensitivity and altered stress hormone levels, was first
diagnosed in Vietnam War veterans and later applied to victims of rape and other
assaults.

In perhaps the most surprising finding, preliminary research suggests that some
children of survivors also have a low level of cortisol, a hormone that controls
stress. Dr. Yehuda, who calls this "intergenerational syndrome," says more
research is required. But traumatized people, she says, need less of the hormone
because their stress systems are so finely tuned. Her findings are to be
published in July in the American Journal of Psychiatry.

Some disagree with the notion of survivors as traumatized.

"They are treating the people who are most seriously damaged," William B.
Helmreich, a City College sociologist who also studied survivors, said of the
Mount Sinai program. In his 1992 book "Against All Odds: Holocaust Survivors and
the Successful Lives They Made in America" (Simon & Schuster), he documented a
happier family life among 470 survivors: more stable marriages, fewer trips to
psychotherapists and greater career success than other American Jews.

Dr. Yehuda, in response, suggested that the low divorce rate reflects fears of
separation, and the low number of psychiatric visits a cultural bias against
such help.

The most important factor, she said, is how an experience affects people: a
terrible event can leave some people permanently traumatized and others
unaffected.

Dr. Kenneth L. Davis, chairman of the psychiatry department at Mount Sinai,
which was founded as Jews Hospital in the 1850's to serve patients other
hospitals spurned, said the hospital had felt a duty to help the survivors and
their families. Most of the 16 professionals in the program donate their time to
13 groups of up to six survivors and two groups of survivors' children.

There is no question the families have faced a rough road.

One woman talked in a therapy session about how devastated she was at not being
asked to the junior prom. "When I was 16, I was in Auschwitz," her mother
snapped.

Dr. Karen Binder-Brynes, a clinical psychologist with the program, notes that
many survivors married to be close to someone when all was lost. They left homes
and a culture for a perplexing new land. They carried terrible memories.

"From day one, the children were raised by parents trying to put their lives
back together," said Dr. Binder-Brynes, who said difficulties often transcend
those of alcoholic households, where children learn the cause of parents'
problems. "All the Holocaust children know is that there is an elephant in the
room, and it is a terrible elephant."

Tomorrow, many survivors and their children will gather for a memorial service
at Madison Square Garden, attended by President Clinton and Foreign Minister
Shimon Peres of Israel, to remember the liberation of the concentration camps 50
years ago. Three weeks ago, on the actual anniversary, Mrs. Krauss noted the
liberation of Auschwitz, where she lost her girlhood, with what she called an
indescribable mix of emotions.

It was her son who had prodded her to remember. Jeffrey Krauss, a venture
capitalist in his mid-30's, had hungered to know everything. Three years ago he
journeyed to the two concentration camps on his own in search of shards of the
family past. He dragged his father to the Holocaust Museum in Washington. He
watched in amazement as his usually taciturn father chattered to strangers about
where he sat on the boxcar. The family's wall of silence was breaking down.

He persuaded his mother to join the Mount Sinai study and was the first to join
a children's group, where he says he confronted his core beliefs: "What has been
passed down to me is that trust is dangerous."

Dr. Yehuda says the Krauss family is typical of those of the 100,000 or so
survivors living in New York. Mr. Krauss owns a butcher shop; Mrs. Krauss for
years owned a boutique. Their two sons went to good colleges and on to jobs on
Wall Street.

Dr. Ruth Heber, a clinical psychologist with the program and herself a survivor,
said children, many now middle-aged, long to make parents happy, often by
achievement. "They felt pressure to make up for their parents' suffering."

The groups allow people to finally find a sympathetic ear, the psychologists
say. Dr. Heber recalled the resonant chord struck in one group when a son said:
"Look, my parents are crazy. They're nuts."

The result was shared feelings of understanding, then praise of the survivors'
strengths. The consensus was that "our parents were able to survive and are
dignified human beings," Dr. Heber said.

In the survivors' groups, a goal is to put a more positive spin on a memory. For
example, said the doctor, one woman recalled her mother's letting go of her hand
as she was led to the gas chamber. When she had a child the same age, it
reawakened the memory, and she had a repeated nightmare -- if only she had not
let go. Only when other members persuaded her to change her interpretation of
the event, and appreciate that her mother would have wanted her survival more
than anything, did the guilt subside.

Ryszard Horowitz, who was among the youngest children to survive Auschwitz and
whose story was one of those depicted in the movie "Schindler's List," left his
group after one 10-week session.

He had figured out his answer to the Holocaust. "With me it's different," he
said. "I don't believe I was there."

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jeffrey Krauss persuaded his mother, Margaret, 62, a survivor
of Auschwitz, to join a counseling program. Under construction behind the
Krausses near Battery Park City is a Holocaust memorial. (Susan Harris for The
New York Times); Mrs. Krauss with her parents in Czechoslovakia in 1934.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              143 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 29, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Business-Hungry Vietnam Forgets . . .

BYLINE: By Peter Ross Range;   Peter Ross Range was Time magazine's last bureau
chief in Saigon.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 23;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The general yawn provoked in Vietnam by Robert McNamara's controversial mea
culpa tells a great deal about the enduring difference between the American and
Vietnamese relationships to the war.

In both Hanoi and Saigon, as the bustling southern city is still commonly
called, the focus is on the present and future, not on the sins of the past. "
Vietnam is a country, not a war," Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai is fond of
saying. Mr. McNamara's tears are not Vietnam's.

Even tomorrow's 20th anniversary of the country's reunification (in Vietnam,
it's the reunification, not the war victory, that counts) is seen as a minor
distraction from the real business at hand -- that of becoming the next Asian
tiger. Workers were building bleachers in the park in front of the old
Presidential palace in Saigon last week for a parade, but almost nobody I met
cared.

Vietnam today is in the business of business. Even Hanoi, the once sleepy
outpost of post-colonial charm and Soviet collectivism, is a cauldron of
capitalism. Everybody, everywhere, is selling something. From the soup stall to
the high-rise construction cranes, the country resembles nothing so much as the
unbridled free-market economies of the West or, better, of the Asian tigers
Vietnam seeks so ardently to emulate. Hanoi is madly striking deals with
international investors eager to rebuild roads, phone systems and the remaining
machinery of a market economy.

Yet American businessmen find themselves handicapped in a game fueled by cash
streams from Hong Kong, Japan, Taiwan, Singapore and Australia. The lack of full
diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Vietnam, held up by the demands of the
tiny missing-in-action lobby, cripples American companies by preventing them
from using such key instruments as the Export-Import Bank. The consensus among
Americans in Hanoi is that closer relations would foster closer cooperation and
enhance the full accounting that M.I.A. lobbyists seek. President Clinton should
break the impasse with a historic exchange of ambassadors with Vietnam.

Hanoi strikes the visitor as a surprisingly free and open place. I detected none
of the dangerous electricity I always felt in the Moscow and East Berlin of old,
where you knew the heavy hand of the secret constabulary was only a phone tap
away. In Hanoi, men in uniform were few and far between; if anything, the city
needs more cops on the street to manage the colossal traffic.

This climate extends to the flow of information. Local TV is heavily
westernized. On my first night in town, I was stunned to see "Apocalypse Now"
showing on the main channel. On other days, Oprah, Popeye, the Masters
tournament and the N.C.A.A. final four -- the jewels of American popular culture
-- washed over the doorman and drivers gathered before the TV set in my hotel
lobby.

Though Government-controlled, the press is relatively uppity, reporting all
manner of corruption, scandal and general incompetence. When the much admired
Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore's semiretired dictator and Hanoi's unofficial chief
adviser, was in town this month, he publicly upbraided the Government of Prime
Minister Vo Van Kiet for "your inability administratively." He was impatient
with continuing bureaucratic impediments to private investment and miffed at yet
another power outage that had killed his mike and darkened the hall where he was
about to speak. All this received front-page treatment in the press.

This does not mean Vietnam is free in larger terms. It is a one-party state with
secret surveillance of those thought to be a threat. Some key Buddhist leaders
are imprisoned, some intellectuals gagged or hounded, some harsh sentences meted
out for the slightest show of dissent -- such as the 15 years given to a man
named Pham Van Quang for waving the flag of the former South Vietnam during the
1992 Ho Chi Minh City international marathon.

Still, political repression is hardly a topic that's on everybody's lips. As
best I could tell, in fact, it was on nobody's lips, unless I brought it up. The
national preoccupation is economic, not political, and Vietnam is clearly a
country on the make.

Nine years into doi moi, Vietnam's perestroika, the leadership is obviously
doing something right. "The Communists have succeeded," said my old
anti-Communist friend Ly Quy Chung one day in Saigon. It was an extraordinary
admission from a former opposition politician, now a journalist, who had battled
both the Viet Cong and the U.S.-supported Government of President Nguyen Van
Thieu in the 1970's.

He meant that his old enemies, after the "10 dark years" from 1975 to 1985, had
now got it right, not merely economically but politically as well. By giving the
people what they want -- the liberty to pursue economic happiness -- the
Communist gerontocracy is able to keep what it wants: full control.

But many think Vietnam, opened to the West and electronically liberated by
sidewalk fax and photocopy stalls, is slouching toward democracy. By putting the
war behind them and eagerly grasping their future, the Vietnamese are able to
forgive and forget and move forward. The question is whether America is ready to
do the same.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              145 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
In a Rifle's Flash, a Lasting Icon of a Nation's Pain

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 38;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


A STUDENT NAMED JEFFREY Miller lies dead on the ground, but the picture is about
a girl screaming, and the sight of that silent cry still makes something inside
clench up like a fist. Photographs are the swiftest keys to memory; they unlock
events and eras and feelings in the blink of an eye.

The Vietnam War is tied up in a handful of corrosive pictures: Malcolm Browne's
photograph of a Buddhist monk calmly immolating himself to protest his
Government's policies, Eddie Adams's picture of the South Vietnamese chief of
national police blowing out the brains of a Vietcong suspect on a Saigon street,
Ron Haeberle's pictures of the My Lai massacre, Nick Ut's image of a little girl
so badly burned by napalm she has ripped off all her clothes and is running
straight toward us. In John Filo's photograph of a girl screaming about death on
an Ohio campus, taken 25 years ago on May 4, the war came home.

That war has not left us alone in the intervening years; indeed, the country's
wounds have not healed but festered. That has been amply shown in the reaction
to Robert McNamara's confession in his just-published book, "In Retrospect,"
that as Secretary of Defense he knew the war could not be won but never said a
word. Every television news show from "Prime Time Live" to MacNeil/Lehrer either
had McNamara as a guest or brought the original hawks and doves back to battle
over his revelations.  Newsweek excerpted McNamara's book. Time did a cover
story on Vietnam. Life reprinted the major photographs of the war. The
journalist Neil Sheehan, who had written brilliantly on the war, returned to
Vietnam for The New Yorker.

Long before all this, on April 30, 1970, President Nixon, having promised the
country peace, announced that American troops had invaded Cambodia. Protests
flared on many campuses. (Before they even started, Nixon, unaware he was being
taped, was caught complaining about "bums blowing up campuses.") After students
at Kent State University torched the R.O.T.C. building, the Governor of Ohio
called in the National Guard.

Some demonstrators threw rocks. The Guard replied with tear gas, then suddenly
opened fire without warning. To judge by the delayed reactions of the people in
the John Filo photograph, most assumed the soldiers were shooting blanks, but
Ohio was one state that permitted the Guard to carry live ammunition. The
kneeling girl cannot contain her anguish at discovering she has just seen
someone killed. Has there ever been another major news photograph that focused
not on an action or even on its aftermath but on the moment of recognition?

When the shooting stopped, four students were dead, eight or 10 (reports varied)
were wounded and one was paralyzed for life. As if in fulfillment of the war's
evil talent for tearing the country apart, our soldiers were now firing on us.

The picture hit the front page on May 5. By May 6, students at 115 American
colleges were reported to be on strike. Fearful of violence, Gov. Ronald Reagan
asked the entire California state college system to close until May 11. When
demonstrators converged on Washington, troops were secretly installed in the
White House basement in case of "invasion." H. R. Haldeman, one of the
President's right-hand men, later said Kent State had marked the beginning of
Nixon's down-hill slide to Watergate.

The shooting magnified the country's deep divisions. On May 25, Newsweek
published a poll asking who was primarily responsible for the student deaths.
Eleven percent said the National Guard; 58 percent said the students.

The girl, Mary Ann Vecchio, was not a Kent State student but a 14-year-old
runaway (some accounts said 15) whose parents found her after the picture was
published. The Governor of Florida said she was a Communist plant. At last
report, she was married, living quietly and working as a cashier in a Las Vegas
coffee shop.

John Filo, then a photography student and now a picture editor at Newsweek, sold
the picture to a news service but refused to allow its reproduction on T-shirts
and posters. People simply stole it.

Kent State built a gym on the hill where the shooting occurred to prevent its
being declared a national historic landmark. Five years ago, a monument was
finally dedicated -- but the real monument is a photograph that lodged in the
nation's mind years ago.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kent State -- On May 4, 1970, a teen-age girl happened onto the
shooting of a student at Kent State University -- Robert McNamara's confessions
about the conduct of the war have proved that the country's wounds have not
healed but festered. (John Paul Filo)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              146 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MEN AT WAR;
Inside the World Of the Paranoid

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1405 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE


WE may never know what part of the shadows of rage and conspiracy Timothy J.
McVeigh emerged from. The man charged with the worst act of terrorism in the
nation's history is said to consider himself a political prisoner, telling
authorities no more than his name and date of birth.

But anyone who has leafed through the literature of self-styled patriot groups,
sampled the worst of anti-Government postings on the computer Internet or looked
at hate tracts will find that there is an old root of paranoia that runs deep in
the national cellar and has sprouted rage and conspiracy for generations.

One current branch leads to the right-wing militias and a world view that Mr.
McVeigh was apparently exposed to, and may well have shared, in the months
before the Oklahoma City blast.




Bar Stools to Broadcasts

Students of American history say that paranoiacs with weapons have always been
with us, from the Whiskey Rebellion of 200 years ago to the present day. But
today, people who have long been dismissed as crackpots and wackos use new
technology to spread the kind of conspiracy theories that used to go no further
than the next bar stool. And, unlike the neo-Nazis and skinheads from the early
1980's -- whose descendants include some of the current groups -- the militias
often invite reporters to their meetings, and they count a handful of police
officers and several members of the new Congress as kindred spirits on many
issues. Militias are active in at least 18 states, with as many as 25,000
members nationwide, although they claim a membership 10 times as large.

On a sunny spring day outside Spokane, Wash., two weeks ago, 300 people paid $13
a head to hear militia leaders excoriate the Federal Government, international
bankers and gun control. Some in the crowd were pot-bellied weekend warriors,
looking for like-minded people to play war games in the woods. Others were bound
up with anger at anyone in government.

"The jury box and the ballot box have failed us," John Trochmann, a co-founder
of the Militia of Montana, told the crowd, though he described violence as a
last resort.

Even as a Republican ascendancy has shifted political discourse rightward, the
militias accept almost as an article of faith that the Government has betrayed
the people, that its leaders are corrupt and that the Constitution has been
subverted. Ross Perot has said some of the same things. But militia members and
other right-wing extremists then go into another dimension, transforming
frustration and alienation into a black-and-white world in which the forces of
one-world government are at the nation's doorstep and the Federal Government and
the F.B.I. together are bitter enemies of true patriots. It is a world of hate
and fear, with a shared belief in the same sinister global forces binding
disparate groups and individuals who have fallen under its sway.

To hear the camouflaged leaders of these groups tell it, the nation is already
under siege by troops hovering in black helicopters who have embedded interstate
road signs with directional codes that only they can read. A few months ago,
Yellowstone National Park received a flurry of phone calls from people who
believed it had been taken over by the United Nations.

"What makes you think it hasn't?" said David Trochmann, who with his brother
John started the Montana militia.

In California, militia members went into high alert after rumors that barbed
wire at an old airfield was now facing inward instead of outward. It was, they
said, prime evidence that the field was being turned into one of the
concentration camps that militia members believe have been constructed for
patriots. The barbed wire proved to be -- as it had been -- facing outward.




Meeting the Enemy

Beyond collecting weapons and sharing manuals on guerrilla warfare, militias
hold assault and defensive drills, raising the question of what exactly it is
they are training to attack or defend. The ultimate enemy, to almost all the
homegrown militias, is the "N.W.O." -- the New World Order. But when push comes
to shove, the "threat" usually proves to be a neighbor with a badge. Militia
groups around the country recently sent out word to come to Hamilton, Mont., to
assist fellow militiamen who had been arrested for driving with expired license
plates.

Still, the New World Order became the top demon in the far right nightmare after
the collapse of international Communism. From a conspirator's point of view, it
is perfect -- evoking one-world government and millennial doom.

The modern usage of the term can be traced to a member of a secret society,
Yale's Skull and Bones social club. President George Bush, a Skull and Bones
member, first used "new world order" in 1990 when he was rallying the world
against President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. A month later Mr. Bush used the term
again, calling on the United Nations to ban certain chemical weapons. Combining
New World Order, the United Nations, and weapons control was proof of a
nefarious plot for many members of the militia movement.

Mr. Bush has been replaced on the enemies list by President Clinton, his wife
and the Federal agents who attacked both the Idaho headquarters of Randy Weaver,
a white separatist, in 1992 (his wife and son were killed during the assault)
and the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Tex., the following year.




Patriots' Game

A recent fax from the Montana militia said Mrs. Clinton belonged to "a coven of
witches." Similar ideas are sold through the militia's catalogue of videos,
along with a handbook on how to engage in domestic terrorism and sabotage.

Some self-proclaimed Christian leaders have gravitated to the militias. The Rev.
Mathew Trewhella, active in the militant wing of the anti-abortion movement,
told a militia rally last year in Wisconsin that parents should arm their
children with "an SKS rifle and 500 rounds of ammunition."

James (Bo) Gritz, who was an Army Special Forces Green Beret in Vietnam and who
founded an armed "Christian Patriots" community in Idaho, regularly espouses a
mix of Christianity and weaponry talk in his speeches and newsletters. He is
perhaps the closest thing the militias have to a true leader, training thousands
of people through his $100-a-day paramilitary seminars.

"The tyrants who ordered the assault on the Weavers and Waco deserve to be tried
and executed as traitors," Mr. Gritz wrote in his newsletter last year.

For the last two years, there has been no greater call in the far right
netherworld than to avenge the Waco siege, in which 80 people died. Timothy
McVeigh was "particularly agitated" about what happened in Waco, according to
court documents.

People who monitor the militias say they evolved from the John Birch Society in
the 1950's -- when fluoride in the water supply was viewed as evidence of a
Communist plot -- through various hate groups in the 1970's and 1980's. The
debate over gun control spurred the militias, which with new technology have
reached broader audiences.




Good Guys and Bad

"When you are relegated to putting out leaflets or crude books, you're not going
to get anywhere," said Rabbi Abraham Cooper, Assistant Dean of the Simon
Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, a Jewish human rights group. "But now out of
nowhere, you can get into the minds of millions of Americans. You can create a
sense of community and empowerment."

Mr. Cooper believes that the militias initially attract people with somewhat
mainstream pronouncements about taxes, gun control or Government bureaucrats.
But then they draw some recruits into accepting their conspiracy theories and
stoke fires of hatred with videos of "what really happened" at Waco.

"These people are seeking a simple understanding of the world," Mr. Cooper said.

David Trochmann, the Montana militia leader, put it somewhat differently. "Where
we come from is very simple," he said. "There are good guys and bad guys out
there. The bad guys have to be stopped."

After the Oklahoma city bombing, Mr. Trochmann and other militia leaders said
they had no doubt about who the "bad guys" were in this case, the ones who
killed all those children and their fathers, mothers and neighbors who worked
for the Federal Government. Those bad guys, militia leaders say, were from the
Government itself -- as part of a plot to discredit the militias.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Some of the 6,000 people, including members of militias and gun
clubs, at a gun-rights rally last year in Lansing, Mich. (Bruce Giffin/Metro
Times); Members of a Michigan citizens militia on patrol. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              147 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 774 words



International 3-17

VIETNAM'S BOOM TOWN
Two decades after Saigon came under the control of Vietnam's Communist North,
the city has become more prosperous than at any time in its history.  1

FRENCH RIGHT UNITES
Jacques Chirac, the conservative candidate for President of France, mended
fences with a former rival, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, at a campaign
rally.  3


GREEK SHIPMENTS DEFY SANCTIONS
American officials have determined that Greek oil companies are shipping
thousands of barrels of fuel through Albania to Yugoslavia in violation of
sanctions.  4

BRITISH LABOR PARTY SHIFT
The British opposition leader Tony Blair took a big step toward power when a
Labor Party special conference voted to scrap a 77-year-old commitment to state
ownership.  8

SRI LANKA PLANES SHOT DOWN
The shooting down of two planes in less than 24 hours, apparently by Tamil
rebels, presented Sri Lanka's Government with its gravest crisis since it took
office.  10

Televised Simpson trial a novelty for British viewers.  9

Could the Tiananmen massacre have been avoided?  12

A Japanese Cabinet official said the U.S. enslaves Japanese people.  13

A softening of stances toward nuclear treaty.  16

In a poll, Americans show support for U.N. peacekeeping.  17

National 20-36

LOOKING FOR A LOOPHOLE
President Clinton asked Attorney General Janet Reno to try to find ways to
enforce a Federal ban on guns within 1,000 feet of a school, despite a Supreme
Court ruling that the ban is unconstitutional. 1

AN AFFIRMATION OF FAITH
Oklahoma City lit four giant crosses on the top of the tallest building downtown
as an affirmation of the faith that seems to be holding people together after
the bombing of the Federal Building. The lights are normally used at Christmas
time.  1

DOZENS OF THE WRONG MEN
Federal agents have interviewed more than a dozen men who resemble John Doe No.
2, the second man suspected in the Oklahoma City bombing, but to no avail.  1

COLD-HEARTED BOOTLEGGERS
Smugglers have responded to the Government's effort to curb the use of
chlorofluorocarbons like Freon, which damage the Earth's protective ozone layer,
by bringing in large amounts of illegal imports that avoid a steep American tax.
1

WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO BE POOR?
Experts at the National Academy of Sciences are about to recommend a change in
the way that poverty is defined, a proposal that would substantially increase
the number of working people who are designated as poor.  1

RIGHT-WING VIOLENCE ON THE RISE
Experts who have tracked extremist violence in the United States for years say
only the size of the bombing in Oklahoma City is new. They say right-wing
attacks have been increasing for a decade.  27

Some far-right broadcasters were taken off the air last week.  28

NEW VOICE ON THE RIGHT
Some prominent conservative writers and strategists are starting a weekly
national magazine on politics and policy.  20

RENOVATING REFUGEE CAMPS
Military commanders are spending $35 million to renovate the Cuban refugee camps
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, before summer sets in.  20

DOUBTS ABOUT SCHOOL GRANTS
Some doubts are starting to emerge among educators about how much the $500
million gift to public education that the philanthropist Walter Annenberg
announced in 1993 will do to help solve the problems of urban schools.  30

TEST FOR WASHINGTON MAYOR
After his stunning political comeback in November, Mayor Marion S. Barry Jr. of
Washington is facing a tough political test in a special election for his old
seat on the City Council.  33

Metropolitan 37-43

A CITY TRANSFORMED
In an effort that has taken $4.2 billion and nine years, New York City has
financed and overseen the creation of more than 50,000 new apartments and
houses, transforming huge swaths of New York's most blighted neighborhoods.  1

CALIFORNIA DREAMING?
There is an old saying in politics that nobody runs for Vice President. So just
what was it that Gov. Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey was doing this week
for three long, hard days as she worked the speech and news-conference circuit
of vote-rich Southern California?  37

MORE THAN GROCERIES
Among shoppers, strollers and people rushing to weekend jobs on a sunny morning
in East Harlem, the question was not why, but when: When will we be able to buy
groceries in a modern store, like people in other neighborhoods?  37

Fresh Air Fund 41

Obituaries 44

Angier Biddle Duke, Ambassador to El Salvador, Spain and Morocco.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              148 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Appeals To Washington

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 29


Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet of Vietnam said today that he shared the pain of the
families of United States servicemen killed during the Vietnam War and urged
both nations to put hatred behind them. He also repeated Hanoi's call on
Washington to normalize ties.

Celebrations of the 20th anniversary of the war's end "are not being held to
recall hatred, but to urge American and Vietnamese people to look forward," he
said after a meeting with Vietnamese leaders and veterans.

President Clinton has said progress on an accounting for servicemen still listed
as missing will help determine the pace of normalizing ties.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              149 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Saigon's Day of Defeat, a Glitter of Rebirth

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1725 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Sunday, April 30


In the glittering chaos of Vietnam's boom town, it is difficult to imagine that
20 years ago today, Saigon was a city so defeated that it was forced even to
sacrifice its name.

Government-issued maps now identify it as Ho Chi Minh City, the name it was
given on April 30, 1975. That was the morning when a North Vietnamese tank
crashed through the gates of the presidential palace of the collapsed,
American-backed Government of South Vietnam.

But for most of this city's four million residents, this is -- and will always
be -- Saigon. They never stopped calling it Saigon.

And exactly two decades after it came under the control of the Communist North,
this city is more prosperous and, in many ways, more powerful than at any time
in its history.

Much more than the aging Communist soldiers in Hanoi who won the war and
humiliated a superpower, the ambitious capitalists of this city are pointing the
way to Vietnam's future -- rushing into the free markets that today even the
Communists must grudgingly endorse.

Anyone who doubts their independence need only witness how the people of the
city are marking the 20th anniversary of its capture.

To be sure, large buildings in the city have been draped in banners and bunting
bearing the hammer and sickle and the grinning, wispy-bearded image of Ho Chi
Minh. But for every banner with a portrait of Ho, another flutters in the warm
breeze with the red, white and blue logo of Pepsi Cola, an official sponsor of
the celebrations.

"I think Saigon is the most exciting city in the world," said Lu Thang, a
25-year-old business student who, when asked about her career goal, replied in a
gentle voice, "Real estate." She said she would miss the anniversary parade
today because she had work to do at her father's newly opened computer store.

The war, she said, "is over -- we do not want to talk about it anymore."

"I think everybody, including all the people in Hanoi and all over Vietnam,
agree that what is best for our country is that we try to make some money and
feed ourselves and have enough clothes," she added. "And we are doing that."

From Embassy Roof, A City Transformed

Twenty years ago this weekend, the view from the top of the United States
Embassy in Saigon was one of panic as thousands of Vietnamese pushed in
desperately against the embassy gates. Their goal was to reach the staircase
leading to the seventh-floor roof, where American helicopters offered the final
route of escape from the city.

The Communists were closing in. Mortar fire had turned night into day. In the
embassy garden, American marines were making a bonfire of millions of dollars in
cash that had been brought into Vietnam to pay informers and was too heavy to
carry out on the helicopters.

Today, the abandoned embassy is crumbling, the helicopter pads coated with
orange-brown rust from the tropical heat. The panorama from the rooftop is one
of a fixed forest of construction cranes, signaling the birth of a futuristic
skyline for Vietnam's largest city.

Since the Communists made their first grudging steps toward the free market in
1986 under a policy known as doi moi, or renovation, the city has been
transformed. Applying lessons of their Western patrons -- first the French, then
the Americans -- the people have set to work on rebuilding a city shattered by
war and the neglect born of poverty. The result is a town that glories in its
newfound prosperity, with freshly painted store fronts decorated in marble and
neon lights.

The most famous boulevard -- known as Tu Do (Freedom) Street before 1975, and
renamed Dong Khoi (Revolution) Street by the Communists -- is crowded with
expensive cafes and boutiques that would not be out of place on the grander
avenues of Manhattan.

Many of the big multinational companies that have rushed back have taken over
decrepit villas dating from the French colonial occupation and turned them into
shimmering palaces of commerce.

At night the streets become a dense parade of fancy new motor bikes. "I wonder
what the old Communists think when they see this new chrome," an American banker
said. "Remind me: Who won this war?"

Hanoi, the once-dour Communist capital, is also beginning to prosper. The
notorious prison known as the Hanoi Hilton, once a place of brutal confinement
for American prisoners of war, is falling to the wrecking ball this month, to be
replaced by a plush office complex.

But there is still no comparison in the wealth of the two cities. Per capita
income in Ho Chi Minh City is nearly $850, more than three times the average in
the rest of the country and almost double that of the capital.

Lingering Bitterness Of the Vanquished

While the physical scars from the war have begun to vanish from Ho Chi Minh
City, the other sort remains. For many Vietnamese, it has proved far easier to
forgive the Americans for any damage that they may have done to this country
than to forgive each other.

"The hostility is always in my mind -- the anger is in my mind even today," said
Le Tay Nguyen, who was a captain in the South Vietnamese Army in 1975.

Mr. Nguyen was one of hundreds of Vietnamese who sat patiently one afternoon
last week on the wooden benches outside the offices of the Orderly Departure
Program. Set up by the United States, the program offers asylum to former
soldiers of the South Vietnamese Government and others who were persecuted after
the war.

Mr. Nguyen said he wanted desperately to leave. After the war, he said, he was
interned for six years in a Communist re-education camp in which conditions were
"terrible." "They knocked out my teeth," he said, pointing to a long row of
dentures along his lower jaw before pointing to his feet. "They ran sticks along
my feet as torture," he explained.

Ee Duc Thanh, 55, clutched papers showing he had worked in the American Embassy
from 1967 to 1975 as a translator. The only reason he was unable to join the
evacuation 20 years ago, he said, was that a thief had stolen a suitcase that
contained the documents verifying his position. It has taken him all these
years, he said, to obtain new copies.

"I must go to the U.S. to live because I have difficulty in my life in Vietnam,"
said Mr. Thanh, who added that his children had paid the biggest price for his
past. "Because I worked for the Americans, my children could not go to
university and they cannot find a good job," he said. "That is why they want to
go to America too."

A few blocks away, in the offices of the Vietnamese Veterans' Association, the
victors in that long-ago war sat beneath a faded lacquer portrait of Ho Chi Minh
and insisted that they had not set out to punish the vanquished. "We know that
some of the South Vietnamese joined in the war with the Americans," said Vo
Thang Kiet, a 66-year-old retired colonel in the North Vietnamese Army. "But for
these people, we do not feel any hostility, any dislike."

That sense of charity was not found at the nearby offices of the Ministry of
Labor, War Invalids and Social Welfare, which has never bothered to include the
South Vietnamese Army casualties in official totals of war dead. "We do not care
about what happened to these people," said Nghiem Xuan Tue, a ministry
spokesman.

Two Decades Later, 'The War is Over'

Twenty years ago this morning, Ly Quy Chung prepared to surrender Saigon to the
Communist North, an act that would reunify his homeland after a generation of
war and the loss of millions of lives, including those of at least 58,000
Americans. The last American diplomats had fled the city hours before.

Mr. Chung, who had been drafted as the Information Minister for the Saigon
Government only three days before its collapse, remembered the quiet as he
waited in front of the presidential palace for something to happen. Finally, he
said, a tank appeared in the distance.

"When the tank arrived, it fired a shot at the palace -- boom -- to create a
certain panic," he said. "They shouted for us to raise our hands to surrender."

The tank crashed through the heavy gates, and a soldier rushed toward the palace
demanding to know how to reach the flagpole on the roof. "I told him to follow
me," Mr. Chung said. "So we went to the elevator, but the soldier refused to
enter because this was the first time in his life that he had seen an elevator,
this strange box."

"I told him not to be afraid," Mr. Chung recalled, grinning at the memory.
"Finally we got to the roof." Minutes later, the red and gold flag of the
Communist forces was fluttering over Saigon, which hours later would become Ho
Chi Minh City.

Mr. Chung had been one of the few opposition politicians in South Vietnam, a
member of the so-called Third Force that opposed the repressive American-backed
regime of President Nguyen Van Thieu.

"History pushed me into this situation," he said of his role in the surrender.
"It was not a happy end for me." But with reunification, he said, "it was a
happy end for the country." Because he had opposed the Thieu Government, Mr.
Chung, now 55, was spared imprisonment in a re-education camp. He is now editor
of his own weekly newspaper, which like all publications in Vietnam is subject
to tight censorship.

But what he cannot say in print in his newspaper, he will say in person. He
readily concedes that the Communists made disastrous mistakes in the 10 years
after they captured Saigon, including collectivist economic policies that drove
the country to the brink of starvation.

"It was a very dark period," he said. "There were bad economic policies, bad
political policies, and that is why so many people left the country in this
period." He was speaking of the mass exodus by more than one million Vietnamese
who became known as the boat people.

Mr. Chung's family was among those who took to the rickety boats. All seven of
his brothers and sisters now live in the United States or Canada, and his mother
later left for New York under the Orderly Departure Program. "I am the only one
left," he said.

With the Government's move to the free market in 1986 and the rebirth of this
city, the conditions that drove his family away have ended, Mr. Chung said.
"Now, I think the life in this city is better than before 1975," he said. "The
people are more optimistic than ever before. The dark period is over. The war is
over."


LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A woman sells T-shirts in Ho Chi Minh City, which has more
entrepreneurial zip now than the Saigon of old. (Associated Press) (pg. 1)

Chronology: "A History of Turmoil"

 Some main events in the history of Vietnam, which has undergone colonization,
war and economic and political turmoil for more than a century.

FRENCH RULE AND RESISTANCE

1859-83 France colonizes Indochina.

1930 Ho Chi Minh founds Communist Party of Indochina.

1940 Japan takes control of Indochina but rules through Vichy French
administration throughout World War II.

1945 Viet Minh nationalists and Communist Party begin insurrections throughout
the country in August, declare end of French rule, abolish monarchy of Emperor
Bao Dai. On Sept. 2, Ho Chi Minh proclaims independence and establishes
Democratic Republic of Vietnam.

FRENCH DEFEAT AND A BREAKUP

1954 French defeated at Dien Bien Phu in May after a 56-day siege, signaling end
colonial rule. At Geneva Conference on Indochina, Vietnam is divided at 17th
parallel pending elections for reunification. Nearly one million people, mostly
Catholics and people fleeing land reform, begin an exodus to south from north,
which came under control of Communists under Ho Chi Minh.

1955 Ngo Dinh Diem, the southern leader, rejects Geneva agreements, becomes
President of Republic of Vietnam, known as South Vietnam.

1956 South Vietnam, with United States support, cancels the elections, which
were expected to favor the Communists.

INTERNAL CONFLICT

1957 Vietnam completes land reforms begun in 1953. People's tribunals convict
landlords.

1959 Communist Party Central Committee supports insurgency in South. Weapons and
men infiltrate down the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Diem steps up campaign against
dissidents.

1960 Military coup in Saigon fails. Communists establish National Liberation
Front in Saigon to unite oppposition to Diem. United States increases aid to
South Vietnam.

1961 People's Liberation Army, the Viet Cong guerrilla force, is formed to
overthrow South Vietnamese Government and gains control of much of countryside.

1962 United States has about 12,000 military personnel in South Vietnam.
Peasants are forced to regroup in 16,000 fortified villages, or "strategic
hamlets."

1963 Government suppression of Buddhists provokes civil unrest. In November,
Diem is overthrown in American-backed coup. He and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu, the
security chief, are executed. By the end of 1963, 80 percent of "strategic
hamlets" are destroyed.

U.S. JOINS THE WAR

The Tonkin Incident

1964 In August, United States reports attack by North Vietnamese patrol boats on
American warships in Gulf of Tonkin. United States begins bombing North Vietnam.
Congress passes Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, allowing President Johnson to take
steps "to prevent further aggression."

1965 Marines land at Danang on March 8, the first American combat troops
officially in Vietnam.

A Turning Point

1968 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong attack American positions across south in
Tet Offensive. Johnson halts bombing of North Vietnam. American military
presence peaks at 549,000 troops.

1969 President Nixon begins withdrawing American ground troops. Ho Chi Minh dies
on Sept. 2.

1970 Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho begin secret talks in Paris.

1971 About 139,000 American troops in Vietnam by year-end.

1972 North Vietnam Army strikes across 17th Parallel. United States steps up
bombing of North Vietnam, in attempt to expedite Paris peace talks, and mines
Haiphong harbor.

1973 Kissinger and Tho sign cease-fire in Paris against wishes of South
Vietnam's President, Nguyen Van Thieu. Peace Agreement signed by all parties on
Jan. 27. United States completes troop pullout in March. Hanoi releases
prisoners of war.

1974 House of Representative rejects Admnistration request for increased
military aid to South Vietnam

THE FALL OF SAIGON

1975 North Vietnam and Viet Cong coordinate attacks. Southern cities fall one by
one until Communist forces seize Saigon on April 30.

Over four days, North Vietnamese first attack from south and east, between city
and sea, and then from north.

REUNIFICATION

1976 In July, Vietnam is reunified as Socialist Republic of Vietnam, after
elections for National Assembly.

1978 In December, Vietnam invades Cambodia to oust the Khmer Rouge.

1979 China attacks Vietnam. Hundreds of thousands of ethnic Chinese flee
Vietnam.

1981-85 Economic crisis in Vietnam.

1986 Sixth Communist Party Congress approves economic reforms.

1989 Vietnam completes troop withdrawal from Cambodia.

1991 After Soviet Union collapses, Vietnam loses main aid donor and markets.
Cambodia peace agreement is signed. Vietnam and China normalize relations.

1992 New constitution reaffirms Communist Party leadership.

1994 In February, President Clinton lifts trade embargo against Vietnam.

1995 In January, Vietnam and the United States settle property claims dating
back to war and set up liaison offices in Hanoi and Washington. (pg. 14)

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              150 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Honoring a Slain Soldier

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 42;   Column 4;   Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Marine rifle detail at Pinelawn National Cemetery on Long
Island firing the last volley of a 21-gun salute at the burial of Sgt. Frederick
Burns yesterday. Vietnam recently returned the remains of the sergeant, who
disappeared in 1967 and was reported to have died in a prison camp several years
later. (Steve Berman for The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              151 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Sunday;
Unwelcome Memories Wake Dead

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 37;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk;   Second Front

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: MONTROSE, N.Y.


THE old bombardier was defying time and falling earthward once more.

Amid a placid drive in the American countryside last year, the man's memory,
uninvited, suddenly reeled back 50 years in perfect detail to the treetops of
Hungary, rushing up at him. His B-24 was aflame and belly-landing again in a
field just like the one stretching eerily beyond the car's windshield. The
74-year-old veteran became the young man falling, shot once more from the skies,
with the walls of time obliterated as he gripped the steering wheel in reliving
the warplane's crash.

"It was a strange feeling," said the man, who allows only his first name, Vince,
in these recollections of World War II, when he was a war prisoner. "I'd be in
control of the car, looking at fields and trees upstate and suddenly think, 'I
could escape along that wall.' "

At the wheel, his alarm that he might be suffering symptoms of mental disease
led him, indeed, to a fresh escape.

Vince is one of 30 World War II veterans who have shown up at the Franklin D.
Roosevelt Veterans Affairs Hospital here, stunned and disturbed, weeping and
guilt-ridden, as commemorative tales of 50-year-old battles sweep the nation
with nostalgia but rake their peace of mind.

THE men thought they had stolidly sublimated their memories of the war's carnage
long ago. They were of that good and victorious war for humanity's future. They
never dreamt, until nightmares struck in retirement, that they might suffer,
decades delayed, from the post-traumatic stress disorder more familiarly
associated with veterans of Vietnam, that war of muddled guilt.

"I mean, these are the tough children of the Depression who went to war, won it
and came home to build fresh lives, always reinforcing the idea that hey, any
trouble, you simply push it down out of sight, push it down," noted Kenneth E.
Reinhard, a clinical psychologist at the center. He is busy treating increasing
numbers of these men. They come forward expressing as much shock at the very act
of memory's delayed invasion as at its grisly details and power to disturb.
"They're from World War II: John Wayne. Real men pushing bad things down and
moving on."

Since last fall, three traumatic stress support groups have begun at the center
for the older vets. Across the country, more men are being treated by the
Government as the half-century mark shreds some old stoicism in the modern
culture of self-centered candor.

"We who are not schooled in the facts about this sort of thing are comforted by
its explanation," admitted Vince, who has gradually overcome reticence before
nine other combat veterans and begun writing an account of his war memories.
"Oh, God, in writing the thing in two nights, I never, never realized the
accuracy and acuity of the recall that was waiting there. Absolutely amazing."

Dr. Reinhard's approach is to see these memories "reframed" not just as
emotional shards but as cognitive tools to be grasped as a natural part of
life's difficulties. "They're entitled to peace of mind and they're wondering
why this comes out now after they held it in so long," he said. "Maybe it's just
time." Retirement, he noted, provides time for sifting for meaning in life's
fading facts. For relating the recent natural death of a loved one, for example,
to that distant stranger -- the enemy soldier in a trench who had to be
strangled in a life-or-death face-off suddenly haunting now from 50 years off.

"DEEP emotions should say you made it out of there and have a chance to live and
see life," the psychologist told Vince. "Have a good life for everybody else who
didn't make it back."

The gray-haired veteran snapped up the notion, as if the war were ending anew.
"Yes, indeed," he exulted. "The other night I was writing these memories down
and had to think, 'Here I am doing this and in a little while I'm going to go
watch my grandson play hockey.' "

The veterans are trying to learn that bad memories have a good place in life,
even after 50 years. War stirs easy notions of patriotism, victory and endurance
for the nation, but darker things for the soldier.

"Death, trauma, helplessness all around," recounted Dr. Reinhard as Vince
gravely concurred. "These moments are crystallized in time. They are there for
these guys."

Vince initiates these memories himself now, the better to control them. And he
is rediscovering the old sort of warrior-peer comfort among men bedeviled yet
exhilarated in war, a war found not so distant after all.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              152 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

False Choices on Terrorism

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


As investigation of the Oklahoma City bombing continues, President Clinton and
Congress have started a necessary but hazardous debate about revising Federal
law and enforcement to combat domestic terrorism. Already, the fine balance
between preservation of domestic tranquillity and protection of civil liberties
is in jeopardy. Mr. Clinton and many lawmakers appear far too ready to give up
liberty to insure safety.

America's history shows how easy it is to suspend liberties in times of trouble.
The paranoid streak in American politics is not solely owned by fringe
paramilitary organizations and demagogues. The Government itself has turned its
powers against innocent citizens again and again in the name of protecting
public safety. Not that many years ago agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation harassed Americans opposed to racial segregation and specialized
in "black-bag jobs," burglarizing the homes and offices of Americans who opposed
the Vietnam War.

Some liberals like Representative Charles Schumer have unwisely forsaken their
traditional allegiance to civil liberties to ride the wave of public revulsion
over the bombing. Mr. Schumer and Mr. Clinton support the Omnibus
Counterterrorism Act of 1995 that, among other things, would permit the
Government to deport aliens suspected of terrorist activity on the basis of
secret information that could be withheld from defendants.

Some Congressional conservatives have wisely cautioned against careless and
hasty legislating. Louis Freeh, the Director of the F.B.I., courageously told
the Senate last week that his agency does not need the relaxation of
investigative guidelines that the White House and many in Congress were quick to
propose.

Proposals to give more money and resources to the F.B.I. deserve approval,
including Mr. Clinton's plan to add 1,000 new agents, prosecutors and support
staff to deal with terrorist threats and acts. Congress should make it illegal
to possess stolen explosives and increase the penalty for transferring firearms
or explosives used to commit violent crimes. It should criminalize the use of
chemical weapons in solid and liquid form (only the gas form is currently
covered). Congress should also require manufacturers of fertilizers and other
raw materials used in bombs to make their products less combustible and easier
to trace.

Beyond these steps, the Administration's shopping list is filled with
unnecessary and unwise provisions dictated more by political expediency than by
law-enforcement need. One of the most dangerous is a plan to revise the 1878
Posse Comitatus Act, which prohibits involvement of military forces in domestic
law enforcement. The Administration is seeking an exception in terrorist cases
involving chemical or biological weapons, arguing that military specialists may
be needed to assist in such cases.

The separation of civil and military police responsibilities is essential to
maintaining civil governance in the United States. There is already one
exception, allowing military assistance in domestic threats involving nuclear
weapons. There need not be others. The military is already free under the 1878
act to provide advice, and the F.B.I. can use some of the $1.5 billion in added
spending Mr. Clinton has requested to train its own units to deal with chemical
and biological weapons. It is better to instruct law enforcement agents to
handle these threats than to open the door to use of military forces unfamiliar
with the constitutional rights that govern domestic police work.

There is also loose talk of expanding electronic surveillance, easing access to
credit and travel records, tapping telephone and computer lines, and making it
illegal to distribute bomb-making information on computer networks like the
Internet. These steps would threaten privacy and free speech. The Government
already has the tools it needs to investigate domestic terrorist threats. The
way to prevent the making of bombs is to control explosive materials, not
computer networks.
 Jamie Gorelick, the Deputy Attorney General, told the Senate, "The choice
between civil liberties and a safe society is a false choice." She is right. But
so far the Administration and Congress seem perilously close to choosing.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              153 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Reluctant Prophet

BYLINE: By Larry Wolff;   Larry Wolff teaches European history at Boston
College. He is the author of "Inventing Eastern Europe" and "Child Abuse in
Freud's Vienna."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 24;  Column 3;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1923 words



CHILDREN AND FOOLS
By Erich Fried.
Translated by Martin Chalmers.
168 pp. New York:
Serpent's Tail. Paper, $14.99.

"THE first real surprise was a huge heap of spectacles," Erich Fried writes in
the story "My Doll in Auschwitz," describing a visit to the concentration camp
in 1967. "Perhaps because they all looked old-fashioned. Understandable. After
all there could not be models from the last two or three decades among them.
Perhaps also because spectacles play with the light in a curious way, when so
many are thrown into a heap. With their rusty metal frames some looked like
hastily sketched spiders or scorpions." Fried, who died in 1988, was one of the
most prominent poets in the German language of the postwar decades, and "My Doll
in Auschwitz" has now been translated by Martin Chalmers, together with a
selection of extraordinary pieces of poetic prose, in a collection entitled
"Children and Fools."

The story about Auschwitz begins with an account of Fried's preparation for the
visit, the reading of other people's accounts and descriptions used as
prophylaxis against the unbearable horror of complete surprise. "Being informed
is always simultaneously the beginning of getting used to something. A feeling
perhaps faintly reminiscent of the satisfaction with which tourists equipped
with a Baedeker identify the characteristic features of a landscape or a city
after a glance at their book." It is impossible not to find oneself fascinated
with such a visitor as he introduces himself on this note of clinical caution,
determined to guard himself from surprise, to anesthetize himself against
horror, to lure us, his readers, into feeling with him an anxious conviction
that we too have had a lot of preparation for contemplating the landscape of
Auschwitz.

Nevertheless, he was not prepared for the spectacles -- old-fashioned, but of a
fashion that Fried, himself bespectacled, would have recognized from the faces
of his own childhood in Vienna. "Even more surprising was the mountain of
children's toys," he continues. "I could not remember ever having read anything
about it." Then, out of that mountain, one toy seized the visitor's attention
and took him beyond mere surprise to the shock of uncanny recognition: "Suddenly
I saw Moritz. Moritz was about 10 inches high, red-haired, with a green jacket
and green trousers. He was on wheels, so that when he was pulled along on the
string, he alternately bent forward and leant back. At the same time he also
swung his arms and legs. It wasn't me pulling him along on the string; I was
separated from him by a glass barrier, but I knew exactly. It was a reunion.
Moritz had been my own doll, broken when I was 4 years old, but now completely
undamaged."

The visit to Auschwitz becomes a sort of "Nutcracker" nightmare, as if the
fantastic tales of E. T. A. Hoffmann were transposed to the evil domain of the
concentration camps, with toys coming to life among the millions of ghosts of
murdered men, women and children. It was not exactly the doll that came to life,
however, but rather the author's childhood that was resurrected in the conjuring
magic of the mass-produced material artifacts from the world before the war.

Fried himself left Vienna at the age of 17 in 1938, after the occupation and
annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany; his father was murdered by the Gestapo.
He emigrated to England and lived there for the rest of his life; it was there
that he became an important poet whose work was read all over Germany and
Austria. He attained a special celebrity in the 1960's as a poet of the left who
addressed the political concerns of the younger German generation, writing poems
against the Vietnam War, and he eventually achieved such a following that, as
measured in sales, he was the most popular poet in Germany. The prose pieces
collected in "Children and Fools," ranging from fantastic parables to personal
memoirs, explore the historical abyss of war and holocaust that separated the
older emigre poet from his own Viennese childhood, like the glass wall at
Auschwitz through which he watched his doll come back to life.

In "The Green Suite" Fried gives the history of a suite of drawing-room
furniture, upholstered in green plush; it is also the history of his family in
Vienna, with early memories of his grandmother's strict pronouncements against
rough play on the fine furniture. At last the history of the 20th century enters
the drawing room: "On 11th March 1938 Hitler marched into Austria, on the 24th
of April my parents were arrested. During the house search the whole family sat
on the green suite, guarded by two policemen. Then I was left alone with my
grandmother. We remained sitting there for two or three minutes without saying a
word, I stroked the plush." In another piece, "Wunderkind Time," it is the child
and not the furniture that takes center stage, for here the story of the author
as a 6-year-old actor in the remarkable theater world of Vienna intersects with
Austrian history at the moment of the workers' demonstration of 1927 and the
murderous police repression that followed. Fried recalls encountering the
protest posters of Karl Kraus, and precociously learning a political lesson from
Kraus, the brilliant journalist, satirist and moralist, Vienna's most absolutely
uncompromising voice. The figure of Kraus (1874-1936), the genius of an earlier
generation, looms large for Fried. In Fried's poetry the attention to wordplay
and to the moral implications of language and meaning indicate the influence of
Kraus, while the apocalyptic ironies and uncompromising directness of the prose
pieces also point to that same literary model. Indeed, one also appreciates the
significance of Kraus's example for Fried's career as a zealously engaged
intellectual on the political scene, publicly embracing even extreme positions
and courting considerable enmity while becoming a hero to a cult of admirers.
Both of these Viennese Jews lived in awkward relation to the Judaism, and
especially the Zionism, of their different historical epochs. While Kraus in
Vienna mocked Theodor Herzl back in 1898 in the essay "A Crown for Zion," Fried
published a controversial collection of anti-Zionist poems, "Hear, Israel!" in
1976. That same year Fried courted controversy again when he hailed the
revolutionary terrorist Ulrike Meinhof as "the greatest German woman since Rosa
Luxemburg," and wrote poetry in sympathetic appreciation before and after
Meinhof's suicide in prison. Karl Kraus, interestingly, paid tribute to Rosa
Luxemburg after she was murdered in 1919. Fried also followed Kraus in a
lifelong dedication to Shakespeare in German: Kraus performed his own versions
of Shakespeare in one-man recitals in Vienna, while Fried in England translated
the plays for German productions beginning in the 1960's.

Fried, like Kraus, was viscerally ambivalent about Austria and especially
Vienna. To be sure, Fried lived to see more evil times in Austria than Kraus
ever knew. In "The Great Day of Linz," Fried recalls sitting by the radio with
his father in March 1938, listening to the broadcast from Linz, where Hitler's
arrival was imminently anticipated. In "My Heroic Age" he ironically recalls the
"heroic deeds, which probably not a soul apart from myself would have recognized
as heroic deeds," during his final months in Vienna, as he doggedly pursued the
formalities that would permit him to emigrate out of Hitler's domain. Fried
diagnosed two different kinds of false consciousness in postwar Germany and
postwar Austria: while Germany after 1945 believed in a new beginning, the year
zero, in Austria it was supposed that getting rid of the bad Germans meant
returning to old and virtuous national values. Fried, who visited Berlin as
early as 1953, did not return to Vienna for a visit until 1962, and 20 years
after that he reclaimed his Austrian citizenship.

FOR Fried the evils of the past, especially the Nazi past, were the key not only
to understanding and excoriating the crimes of the postwar present, but also for
imagining the monstrosities of the future. In a brilliant philosophical fantasy,
"The Real," we are invited to consider a public program for the construction of
concentration camps on a new, modern, efficient and extensive scale. The camps
have no designated victims: "They are built solely and simply in case of an
emergency, to make sure that if things should ever come to the worst, we have
the necessary installations available." The ironic modulations with which the
author renders the voice of naive and unabashed evil reminds one of Kafka's
penal colony. In fact, the spirit and style of Kafka are evident throughout in
Martin Chalmers's chilling translations of Fried's ironic prose. In "The
Artificers" Fried imagines a secret organization of German scientists devoted to
devising ingenious efforts to sabotage Hitler's war effort -- but, alas, none of
the elaborate schemes ever take effect. In "Miss Groschel," a weirdly unsettling
short story, an evil emigre with secret Nazi sympathies works in a refugee
organization in New York during the war, and destroys a file in order to
guarantee the extermination of his childhood governess in Germany.

The pieces collected in "Children and Fools" vary tremendously in genre, from
apparent memoirs to evident parables -- like "St. George and His Dragon" or
"Tortoise Turning." Yet it is strangely difficult to sort out fiction from
nonfiction in Fried's prose, for poetic style and philosophical skepticism blur
the boundaries between memoirs and stories. The selections are actually taken
from four different volumes, published in German over the course of 20 years. In
Fried's collected works, published in Berlin in 1993, one can see that each
volume had a literary character of its own, and one of those volumes actually
took as it subtitle "True Stories and Valid Lies," to underline the author's
hesitation in evaluating his own words.

"Yesterday, before going to sleep, I drank up my milk, which as a child I had
spilled in anger. I drank it out of the cup with the floral design, and as I
emptied it, I saw at the wet gleaming bottom the big red rose, just as my
grandmother had always promised. Except that I had never drunk up then, and had
finally smashed the cup. This time, however, my grandmother would be satisfied
with me, I knew that." Thus begins "Atonement," the first piece of the
collection, perhaps a prose poem, revealing the author's readiness to come to
terms with the figures from his past. In the beautiful concluding piece,
"Comfort," he remembers his grandmother's words of consolation when, as a child,
he was upset over images of the Christian martyrs: "But after all, they couldn't
be alive anymore anyway." Decades after the end of the war Fried contemplates
the cold comfort of knowing that his grandmother, murdered by the Nazis,
couldn't be alive anymore anyway herself. At Auschwitz, Fried stood in an
"almost idyllic" meadow where others once stood and undressed before going to
the gas chambers. " 'If I scrape with my foot now,' it occurred to me, 'then
I'll find a button.' I scraped very lightly with the tip of my shoe, wet and
gleaming from the grass. There lay the button, small, whitish in front of my
black shoe, much lighter than the gray-brown earth. A little mother-of-pearl
button." In "Children and Fools" Fried excavates the miraculous artifacts of
memory and history that speak to him and to us across the terrible terrain of
the 20th century.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              154 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Movies Finally Look on the Dark Side of War

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, April 30


In a new film released in Vietnam last week, the hero, a veteran named Hung, is
a crazed tramp who lives on the streets and has hallucinations that the people
around him are enemy soldiers. He "fires" a bamboo pipe he mistakes for a
machine gun and frightens villagers, who want him locked away in an insane
asylum.

A John Wayne war epic this is not.

It is an odd, and remarkable, story for a film released as this country
celebrates the 20th anniversary of the Communist victory in the Vietnam War.

"Of course, we could not make a film like this before," said the film's
producer, Nguyen Dat Hai. He fought with the Vietcong, even though his three
brothers were officers in the South Vietnamese Army and fled to the United
States after 1975.

"But now we have more freedom," Mr. Hai said. "We wanted to tell the true story
of the war. Even now, the veterans still suffer from a sickness of the mind. To
treat this sickness there is no medicine. Only the hearts of the people can help
them."

The Vietnam War inspired a number of popular films in the United States, some of
which helped to focus attention on neglected war veterans.

In Vietnam, the war has been fodder for dozens of films since 1975, all dealing
with the heroic aspects. Film makers dared not explore the darker side: the
impact on the soldiers and their families.

With the release of Mr. Hai's "You'll Come Back" and three other recent films,
that threshold has been crossed.

In "People Looking for the Past," a Communist soldier is despondent and
incapable of getting on with his life after the war. He takes a journey back to
a Mekong Delta battleground and along the way encounters an old girlfriend, a
nemesis and ghosts of fallen soldiers.

Two other films also explore the troubled lives of war veterans.

"The films do not criticize Vietnam or the U.S.," said Nguyen The Dung, the
director of "People Looking at the Past." Criticizing the Government is still
not allowed, film makers say, and criticizing the United States is seen as
pointless.

"We want to talk about the life of the soldier who suffers," Mr. Dung said.

The shift in direction of the war genre here reflects two changes in society: a
relative openness that allows some debate over Vietnam's recent history, and the
introduction of market economics.

Even though film companies are Government-owned, they are having to become
self-sufficient. But all films must still be approved by censors; the title of
"People Looking at the Past," for instance, was changed from "Beggars Searching
for the Past" because the word "beggars" was seen as condescending.

"People are bored with the war," said Nguyen Quang Song, a novelist and
screenwriter whose war film "The Wild Fields" was screened in the United States
in 1988.

Indeed, an informal survey of moviegoers and customers at video shops found
little interest in war movies. "We like love stories and action movies," a young
Vietnamese man said. The only war movies some customers at a video shop seemed
to like were American.

"We love 'Rambo,' " one man said, "even though we are not supposed to see it."

Mr. Song said: "Films about the battlefield are not popular. They do not make
any money. Since the Government does not fund films anymore, we have to make
films that people will see."

A film critic, Le Thu An, said people wanted to see war movies only if they
dealt with the influences of the war on their lives today. "They do not want to
see any more films about the battlefield," she said. "That is irrelevant. They
want detail about how people go on with their lives."

Although she thinks the new direction of Vietnamese war films is a positive
development, she is nonetheless critical. In "You'll Come Back," she said, "they
make it so people watching the movie are afraid of the veteran, not sympathetic
toward him."

Indeed, the veteran, Hung, is a pathetic character. But perhaps even more
revealing are the heartless attitudes of some of the villagers and authorities.

When he is finally reunited with his family, who thought him long dead, stubborn
local authorities refuse to grant him veteran's benefits. A local official
snaps: "You are not the only family with a war invalid. How can we solve
everything right away?"

And after the old soldier suffers a flashback and goes on a rampage, a neighbor
tells the family it is unfair for them to keep this "lunatic" in the village.

The film is a true story, said Mr. Hai, the producer.

"There are many veterans like this," he said. "Many of them are badly treated.
The Government cannot take care of all of them. But we make this film so people
will understand their situation."

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              155 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: IN ARIZONA;
A Town Where Gun-Toting Individualists Can Blend Right In

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: KINGMAN, Ariz., April 30


Lovingly restored Chevys and Thunderbirds from the 50's and 60's cruised old
Route 66 here today in an annual celebration of the romance of the open road
that temporarily slowed the hunt for suspects in the Oklahoma bombing by
evicting all the F.B.I. agents from their rooms in the Quality Inn.

"We threw them out," said Dorothy Brown, the motel's desk clerk, who like most
people here remains unawed by government. She reported that she had told 27
special agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to leave and had informed
22 others that there was no room.

"They did come and flash their badges, but heck, they're no better than anybody
else," Ms. Brown said.  "We've been booked up for this weekend since March a
year ago."

Ms. Brown was expressing a common attitude in this crossroads high-desert town
of gun-toting individualists, where intersecting highways and old Army buddies
from Fort Riley, Kan., attracted Timothy J. McVeigh, the only person arrested so
far in the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City.

A glance at a map of the interstate highway network shows that this seemingly
isolated town is actually a transportation hub, particularly for someone like
Mr. McVeigh who seems to have done most of his traveling in battered old cars.

Interstate 40 runs east-west through here, directly to Oklahoma City, among
other places. Interstate 135 runs north from Oklahoma City toward Fort Riley.
According to the state Transportation Department, about 10,000 vehicles a day
travel through the crossroads of Interstate 40 and United States Highway 93 at
the center of town, where Lieut. Edward Beale of the Navy opened the first road
in 1857, using camels to get through the desert.

And it is a place where a man wearing old Army fatigues, loving firearms and
hating the Government would blend in like a long-haired radical might have faded
into Berkeley, Calif., in the 1960's. It is likely, for example, that Mr.
McVeigh's haberdashery was Archie's Bunker, a military surplus store that stocks
jackets with the slanted chest pockets of the Vietnam era for veterans renewing
their wardrobes. But the owners, George and Valerie Hilton, have told F.B.I.
agents that so many men come through they would have no way to remember Mr.
McVeigh.

"A lot of people come out here to get away from the Government, own land and do
their own thing," said Bill Ekstrom, the Mohave County Attorney.

Kingman, where Mr. McVeigh had been regularly picking up his mail at a private
postal service for the last two years, was also home to Mike Fortier, one of his
closest friends from Charlie Company of the 16th Infantry Regiment at Fort
Riley.  Terry Nichols, another buddy from the same company, lived just a short
drive away in Las Vegas, Nev. Mr. Nichols, along with his brother James, is
being held on bomb-making charges in Michigan; the authorities think both
brothers may be involved in the Oklahoma bombing.

The F.B.I. has been concentrating much of its investigation of the Oklahoma
bombing here in the last few days, moving from desks in the local sheriff's
office to a new headquarters in a National Guard armory. They have rented heavy
four-wheel-drive vehicles in apparent anticipation of searches in the rugged
mountains nearby.

Agents have been back again at the Canyon West trailer park, where Mr. McVeigh
once lived, looking for other possible suspects, and local residents who have
been questioned say they are asking, among other things, about Kingman high
school graduates and a white Datsun truck.

In the parking lot of Carl's Jr. drive-in, across Beale Street from the armory,
the stakeouts of reporters, photographers and television satellite trucks were
joined by a few people from the yearly Route 66 Fun Run, like Rudy Sjobakken, a
Las Vegas silversmith who used to repair antiques for Liberace.

The event, which attracts about 650 restored cars, marks the time when Route 66,
which in Kingman is named Andy Devine Avenue for the town's most famous native
son, was the road through much of the country and inspired the picaresque
television series and Bobby Troup song "(Get Your Kicks on) Route 66."

"Kingman has grown faster than any part of Arizona," said Mr. Ekstrom.

The boom has been fueled largely by new gambling casinos along the Colorado
River, 25 miles west, in Laughlin, Nev., and an influx of Californians sick of
earthquakes and other natural disasters, urban crime and, particularly, taxes.
These developments bring, Mr. Ekstrom said, "a wide diversity of individuals and
a very great tolerance of different life styles."

"There's a lot of gun ownership," he added.

The feeling of tolerance, he went on, allows him to remain friends with Walter
(Mac) McCarty, a 72-year-old retired Marine First Sergeant, who spends much of
his time picketing Mr. Ekstrom's offices because county employees make him
remove his pistol when he comes in to pay taxes. Mr. McCarty also teaches a
gun-handling course that was attended by Mr. McVeigh, although Mr. McCarty said
that the suspect already seemed to know quite a bit about the subject.

Another prominent local resident is Jack M. Oliphant, who as a leader of the
Arizona Patriots, a forerunner of the militia movement, was convicted and jailed
in 1987 for conspiracy to rob an armored car in Laughlin.

The Patriots, the authorities said, planned to use the money to finance a
320-acre paramiltary training camp near Kingman, from which they would overthrow
the Government by, among other things, blowing up Arizona dams, power plants,
Internal Revenue Service offices, synagogues and abortion clinics.

Mr. Oliphant still lives on his camp west of town -- and uses the same private
mail depot as Mr. McVeigh did -- and the authorities believe he runs some
militia-training sessions. But sheriff's deputies and park rangers say that
although there are pockets of survivalist bands hidden in the mountains, there
does not seem to be a large, organized militia here.

Indeed, Ray Smith, a 39-year old computer technician from Mesa who is the
commander of an Arizona militia that claims 25,000 members, says that people
here are so suspicious of the government and everybody else that it is difficult
to recruit members.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              156 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Simon & Schuster Is Making Shift in Focus

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section D;  Page 10;  Column 4;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 599 words


To be a publisher of traditional books in an age of CD-ROM's and Web sites is to
be more than a little concerned about the future of your business.

Some publishers are still doing their best to ignore the technology, hoping they
can hold on to their niche and band of loyal book customers. They know that the
risk and capital investment needed to compete in electronic publishing is
substantial. A growing number of others, however, have begun aggressively
staking out a share of the changing market.

Among those is Simon & Schuster, the biggest English-language publishing company
in the world, whose president, Jonathan Newcomb, has spent his first 10 months
in office realigning the company to focus on international publishing and
educational technology ventures.

In the most formal indication of that effort, Mr. Newcomb is expected to
announce today the merger of Simon & Schuster's business, training and health
care units with its international group, the expansion of a new educational
technology group and the appointment of a new management team that will focus on
expanding the company in the international and technology markets.

Among those named to head the new ventures are David Wan, who will become
executive vice president for strategic planning and corporate development;
Martin Kenney, who will be the executive vice president of the education group
and president of the new educational technology group; Martin Maleska, who will
be president of the international, business and professional group, and Mitchell
Haber, who will be the executive vice president and general manager of that
group.

"There are two forces driving major change in publishing," Mr. Newcomb said in
an interview. "One is technology and the other is globalization. The
organization that we've put together here sharpens our focus in those two
areas."

Since he took office in July, Mr. Newcomb has been chipping away at Simon &
Schuster, the publishing arm of Viacom, trying to remold it into what he
describes as a more future-focused company.

In that time he has sold several businesses, including Simon & Schuster Young
Books, Prentice Hall Professional Software and two divisions that publish legal
and financial books. He has reduced the number of children's trade imprints from
19 to 5 and wrapped together several reference and computer divisions.

But he has also been building the company, especially in the areas of technology
and international publishing. He has created a $10 million development fund for
new products, started Macmillan Digital USA and Sams.net, two imprints to
produce reference books in an electronic format, and formed alliances with
America Online Inc. and the Virtus Corporation.

In addition to its 32 foreign offices, Simon & Schuster has recently opened an
office in Beijing, reopened its South Africa office and expanded operations in
France. There are plans to open offices in Chile, Colombia and Vietnam in the
next year.

In 1994, technology sales represented 22 percent of Simon & Schuster's $2
billion in revenues. Half the company's revenue came from educational
publishing. International sales represented 15 percent, and in the last four
years the company's business outside the United States has grown at a yearly
rate of nearly 20 percent.

"The lines between people who are just publishers and those who are
entertainment companies and magazine companies are beginning to blur," Mr.
Newcomb said. "We want to be the major technology-driven content provider in the
worldwide economy. That's how we are trying to position ourselves."

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              157 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 801 words



International A3-11

U.S. TO CUT IRAN TRADE

President Clinton said he will cut off all United States trade and investment
with Iran in an effort to fight terrorism and the spread of nuclear technology.
A1

JAPAN'S OUTBURST OF CALM

The March 20 nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway shocked Japan, yet what is
remarkable by American standards is how restrained Japan has been.A1

Japan's Prime Minister, and his party, could disappear soon. A9

GERMANY COMES TO TERMS

In a month of Holocaust observances, Germans have shown themselves more willing
to face their country's past than at any time since World War II's end.  A1

20TH ANNIVERSARY IN VIETNAM

Vietnam celebrated the 20th anniversary of the end of the Vietnam War without
the spirit of unity the Communist leadership has struggled to project.  A3

DEATH IN ISRAELI CUSTODY

A Palestinian who died in Israeli custody last week suffered fatal brain
injuries when his head was forcefully jerked as he was violently shaken, a
pathologist said.  A6

BOSNIA CEASE-FIRE TOTTERS

A four-month cease-fire in Bosnia that failed to bring lasting peace slipped
toward its demise as the Muslim-led Bosnian Government rejected an extension.
A10

Rome Journal: Computerizing the Vatican Library.  A4

National A12-15, B6-9

GAWKING AT DEATH SCENE

Droves of sightseers are traveling to Oklahoma City to visit the wreckage of the
bombed building.  A1

HOPE FADES IN OKLAHOMA CITY

Rescue leaders made a dreaded but inevitable decision: they can no longer risk
the lives of the living to free the remains of the dead.  A1

SELDOM-USED SURVEILLANCE

As Congress prepares to give Federal agents new authority to plant wiretaps, 10
years of Government records show that such surveillance has played a small role
in rooting out domestic terrorism.  B6

THE REBUILDING OF A DOWNTOWN

With more than 300 buildings near the explosion site damaged, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has set up a relief center to help people begin to
rebuild.  B7

YOUTHS ALONE BUT HOPEFUL

More than 200 Haitian children remain at Guantanamo Bay while refugee
organizations search for relatives. But many of them dream of coming to the
United States.  A1

THE FALL OF SAIGON REMEMBERED

More than 1,000 former South Vietnamese soldiers and officials gathered in
California for the 20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon.  A12

WHISPERS AT A HORSE SHOW

Lexington Journal: Indictments of insurance fraud have cast a shadow over
Kentucky's annual three-day show-horse event.  A12

FISHING FOR RODENTS

Baltimore's booming rat population has led to the creation of a new sport: rat
fishing. Animal rights advocates are not happy.  A12

ADOPTIONS BY GAY PARENTS

New York and Virginia courts dealt setbacks to adoptions by gay parents, but
Florida's Supreme Court questioned the state's right to ban adoptions by
homosexuals.  A13

THE MUTATIONS OF VIRUSES

Scientists have found evidence that viruses can mutate and become deadly because
of nutritional deficiencies in the infected hosts.  A14

TALKS ON MEDICARE DELAYED

Congressional leaders said that they would defer proposals to restructure
Medicare so the matter would not become tangled in efforts to slash the budget
deficit.  B8

THE SURGEON GENERAL NOMINEE

When Dr. Henry Foster goes before the Senate committee to be confirmed as
Surgeon General, two main issues will be faced: partisan politics and abortion.
B8

Metro Digest B1

EXPERTS DOUBT EXODUS OF POOR

Experts say Mayor Giuliani's prediction that many poor people would move out of
New York as a consequence of welfare cuts overestimates their importance in
people's choices about where to live.  A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

The Prado plans to expand.  C11

Janet Leigh's "Psycho" obsession.  C11

Theater: "The Rose Tattoo." C11

"Amphitryon." C14

Music: Anita Baker.  C16

New World Symphony.  C18

Dance: "Giselle" by American Dance Theater.  C18

Books: "Edmund Wilson." C15

Sports C1-10

Basketball: Hornets even series with Jordan and the Bulls.  C1

Hockey: Rangers will get the chance to defend Stanley Cup.  C1

Olympics: The race is on for tickets to the Atlanta Games.  C1

Obituaries B11

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Mr. Dole's assault on regulations.

Mafia-fighting in Italy.

Faces.

Supermarket success.

Letters

William Safire: My Russian friends.

Anthony Lewis: "This is America."

David Halberstam: Nashville revisited -- lunch-counter days.

Max Baucus: Montana mean time.

Bridge C16

Chronicle B9

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              158 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Preparing to Commemorate the Fall of Saigon

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., April 30


When more than 1,000 former South Vietnamese soldiers and officials gathered
here recently before the 20th anniversary of the fall of Saigon, they talked of
flags and memorials, but they also talked of funerals. Too many veterans are
dying poor, they said -- too poor to afford a coffin.

"Many die every week," said An Nguyen, a local businesswoman who does volunteer
work to help elderly Vietnamese veterans. "Every week I go to the cemetery."

So instead of planning a commemoration, the men at the recent gathering made
plans for a mutual-assistance fund to pay for funerals.

Most of these veterans are part of the final wave of refugees from the Vietnam
War, former political prisoners who have at last been freed by Hanoi to come to
America. Since 1990 they have arrived by the tens of thousands, their health and
spirits often broken by their ordeal, too old or tired to start over again.

Early in the morning, at the cavernous Asian Garden Mall here in the refugee
community known as Little Saigon, about 30 miles south of Los Angeles, scores of
these former prisoners can be seen sitting at a long row of tables, smoking
strong cigarettes and reading the local Vietnamese-language newspaper, The Nguoi
Viet Daily News.

Many are jobless. Many of those who do have jobs -- former colonels, teachers
and provincial governors -- support themselves by sewing or trimming threads in
local garment factories.

On a recent Saturday, the newspaper carried excerpts from the newly published
memoir of former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara, in which he calls the war
a terrible mistake and blames the South Vietnamese for much of its failure.

"This makes them very confused," said Yen Do, the newspaper's publisher, in an
interview. "The war is all they have in their lives. They grew up, they
mobilized, they fought and they were imprisoned. Now they have arrived here, and
they have nothing."

In the early-morning quiet, over cups of coffee sweetened with condensed milk, a
former prisoner told a ghost story that is well known here.

In the days after Saigon fell on April 30, 1975, the Communist victors bulldozed
the graves of South Vietnamese soldiers at the Mac Dinh Chi Cemetery just north
of town. They toppled a bronze statue called "Grief," the poignant symbol of the
cemetery, which portrayed a seated and exhausted soldier.

Since then, the former prisoner said, passers-by have reported seeing a
disconsolate soldier -- the soldier from the statue -- wandering near the
cemetery. The Communist authorities, fearing an anti-government provocation, or
perhaps fearing the ghost itself, sent patrols out.  But whenever it was
approached, the apparition disappeared.

That ghost story -- like so many from Vietnam -- has a sequel here.

After the end of the war, the statute's sculptor, Nguyen Van Thu, spent eight
years in a labor camp, along with high-ranking military officers and officials
of the former South Vietnam Government. After his release, he fled Vietnam by
boat, and today he, too, lives here, surrounded by the ghosts of his past.

In a tiny garden filled with sunlight and bird song, Mr. Thu is hard at work
building imagined monuments -- small plaster statues that symbolize the
aftermath of the war. "Prison" portrays his years in solitary confinement, where
a cockroach was his only companion. "Escape" depicts a mother with two children
fleeing across the ocean.  "Ally" honors an American rescuer carrying a
Vietnamese child to safety.

Mr. Thu has also recreated his memorial statue, "Grief," in miniature, and has
produced a plan for a new monument in Little Saigon that would incorporate it. A
local group is raising money to open a cemetery where Vietnamese residents --
including the elderly veterans -- could be buried. If Mr. Thu realizes his
dream, his statue could once again watch over the graves of former South
Vietnamese soldiers.

As the 20th anniversary of the end of the war approached this week, the red and
yellow wartime flag of the Republic of Vietnam began appearing on the streets of
Little Saigon, where Vietnamese shops and restaurants predominate.

Phan Nhat Nam, a former paratrooper and wartime journalist, and a heroic figure
among the people here, recently risked being called a traitor by stating the
obvious: "The flag is a great symbol, and it has deep meaning in my heart, but
it does not have any other meaning.  The Republic of Vietnam has vanished. These
people want the war to continue, but the war no longer exists."

Mr. Nam, 52, is the author of a series of books, written from the battlefield,
that have become the classic South Vietnamese chronicle of the war.

"I got goose bumps when we met; I almost cried," said Shon Luong, a younger
refugee who grew up in America and said he had been reading Mr. Nam's accounts
since he was 14. "Because of him, I joined the Marines. Reading him, I got my
ideas about duty and honor."

In an interview here this week, Mr. Nam, who spent 14 years in a Communist labor
camp, said he viewed his resettlement in the United States last year as the
latest in a lifetime of challenges.

"I survived the war," he said. "I survived prison. Now I must survive my
freedom, and it is very hard. We are old men now. We have lost the ability to
adapt and renew."

Like many other prisoners whose families fled to America ahead of them, he said
he was estranged from his wife and children. "My family is now an American
family with American feelings. I am still Vietnamese with Vietnamese feelings.
We have no common language."

Mr. Nam said he lost his family, along with his future, in the chaos of the last
days of the war when they were separated at Saigon's airport.  Not knowing
whether his wife and children had managed to flee, which they had, he stayed on
to help direct the final evacuations of the airport.

On the morning of April 29, Mr. Nam said, the South Vietnamese C-119 helicopter
gunship that had been circling the airport to protect it from attack was shot
down by North Vietnamese gunners.

"I went to the wreckage, and the pilot jumped out," Mr. Nam said. "I took a
photograph of the wreckage, and then I began to cry, because I knew that that
was the end of the war. I turned and left the airport and went home.

"At that moment," Mr. Nam said, "I realized that I was dead. In my mind, I had
died in the war. And in my mind, I have been dead from that moment until today."


LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the Los Angeles suburb of Westminster, former Vietnamese
soldiers live with the past's scars. Nguyen Van Thu, a sculptor, stood in his
studio with statues he is building in memory of the Vietnam War. (Marissa Roth
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              159 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Unity Is Missing as Vietnam Remembers War's End

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, April 30


The Vietnamese Government celebrated the 20th anniversary of the end of the
Vietnam War today with bursts of fireworks and a grand parade through the
streets of the city once known as Saigon, but without the spirit of unity that
the Communist leadership has struggled to portray.

That Vietnam still has far to go in reuniting north and south was obvious in the
barricades set up throughout the city, preventing all but Communist Party
members and invited guests from watching a parade that brought together the
aging soldiers who defeated a superpower.

There was heavy security along the parade route, apparently out of fear that
opponents of the Government might use the anniversary as an opportunity for a
protest in front of television cameras from around the world. There was no
protest.

"I feel very happy about this anniversary and the reunification of our country,
but I feel bad because I cannot get to the parade," said Nguyen Hung, 42, an
English teacher, who stood across the street from the former United States
Embassy here, straining to catch even a glimpse of the parade, a camera around
his neck.

"The camera is useless today," he said with a smile of resignation.

Still, if the Vietnamese of the north and south have not yet made peace with
each other, the country's leaders made clear today that they were interested in
peace with their former enemy, the United States.

Their speeches to mark the anniversary were remarkably free of the venomous
rancor about the United States that marked earlier anniversaries of the capture
of Saigon -- renamed Ho Chi Minh City after the Communist victory -- and the end
of a war that took more than three million lives, including those of 58,000
Americans.

Speaking from a grandstand within sight of the former Presidential Palace, where
the Saigon Government surrendered on April 30, 1975, Mayor Truong Tan Sang spoke
of the anniversary as "a resplendent milestone" for Vietnam but did not even
once mention the United States, the archenemy of the Communist forces in
fighting that lasted a decade.

On Saturday in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet
recalled raids by American B-52 bombers, the massacre at My Lai and other
"genocidal crimes" committed by the Americans during the war.

But at the same time, he urged the Vietnamese to "shut the door to the past and
look to the future to raise our national spirit, expand international relations
and work together with other countries for peace, cooperation and development."

Vietnam is eager for full diplomatic and trade relations with the United States,
which last year lifted a 19-year-old trade embargo that had crippled the
Vietnamese economy.

In January the United States opened a diplomatic liaison office in Hanoi but
said it would not agree to full diplomatic relations until there was additional
progress in determining the fate of more than 2,000 troops still listed as
missing in action from the war.

Mr. Kiet was in Ho Chi Minh City today and watched the parade from the
grandstand, seated alongside the legendary general of the Communist army, Vo
Nguyen Giap, the "Red Napoleon" who defeated the French Army at Dien Bien Phu in
1954 and was among the architects of the war against the United States and the
American-backed Government of South Vietnam.

Before the parade, General Giap joined in laying wreaths before a statue of Ho
Chi Minh, Vietnam's revolutionary leader. The general was dressed in a gray
uniform adorned only with the Hero of the People's Army of Vietnam medal, the
nation's highest military award.

"The Vietnamese people have put this war behind them," said Michael Liscio, 52,
a Navy veteran from Sherman Oaks, Calif., who was with the first American combat
forces to land in Vietnam in 1965 and who today was invited to watch the
anniversary parade as a guest of the Vietnamese Government.

Mr. Liscio, who last week completed a 1,300-mile, two-month run from Hanoi to Ho
Chi Minh City, said that after meeting with Vietnamese from all parts of the
country, "I think there is still a difference between the people in the north
and the people in the south, just as there was a difference in the United States
a hundred years ago after the Civil War."

"But now these people want peace," he added. "Basically these people are not
warriors -- they are warm, friendly people who want to move on."

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A parade through Ho Chi Minh City yesterday celebrated the 20th
anniversary of the Communist victory in the Vietnam War. Among the spectators
were women dressed as Vietcong guerrillas waving flags. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              160 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
'This Is America'

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words


The F.B.I. spied for decades on the N.A.A.C.P. and other civil rights groups
that J. Edgar Hoover thought had a Communist tint. Under its Cointel program the
bureau shadowed, raided and harassed Americans who opposed the Vietnam War.

The memory of those abuses is strong enough, still, to make politicians wary of
responding to Oklahoma City by giving the F.B.I. carte blanche to investigate
suspected terrorists. Speaker Newt Gingrich said: "No one is suggesting the kind
of open-ended authority that existed 30 years ago."

But there is a danger that Congress, in the urge to act against terrorism, may
unwittingly pass legislation opening the way to the same kind of abuses. The
danger lies in President Clinton's proposed Omnibus Counterterrorism Act.

The Clinton bill, proposed months ago, is aimed at foreign terrorist groups. But
one section that would allow Federal investigators to target Americans of
particular political beliefs -- just as in the bad old days. To explain why
requires a bit of history.

President Ford's Attorney General, Edward H. Levi, a conservative lawyer of
old-fashioned rectitude, made it a priority to prevent any more excesses like
those in Cointelpro. In 1976 he adopted guidelines for the F.B.I. that barred
investigation of political groups unless there was reason to believe they
planned or had committed a crime.

After the Oklahoma City bombing, some people quickly proposed that the Levi
guidelines be loosened to give the F.B.I. more leeway. But Senator Bob Dole,
among others, questioned whether a change was wise or whether in fact the rules
already gave the F.B.I. all the scope it really needed. President Clinton
decided -- at least tentatively -- to make no change in the guidelines.

But there is another way to get the F.B.I. back into the business of
investigating political groups. That is to make certain kinds of political
action and political association criminal -- and thus subject to investigation.
And that is what the proposed Omnibus Terrorism Act would do.

The legislation would let the President designate any foreign organization as a
terrorist group, and similarly to designate individual Americans and
organizations that raise funds for or otherwise support such a foreign group.
The bill would then make it a crime to give money to, or raise it for, such a
group -- even if the money goes to peaceful, political or humanitarian
activities.

The example in people's minds is fundamentalist Islamic groups such as Hamas,
which has carried out terror attacks in Israel. Understandably, Israel wants to
keep American money from going to Hamas. But the bill would sweep much more
broadly.

The African National Congress, for decades the main political opponent of
apartheid in South Africa, was long deemed "terrorist" by the U.S. Government
because it carried out sporadic guerrilla actions. If the Clinton bill had been
law, Americans who gave $10 to attend an A.N.C. anti-apartheid event would have
committed a crime.

Many have contributed to the I.R.A. or other groups connected with the
nationalist cause. Those contributions, too, would be crimes under the Clinton
bill. And the F.B.I. would be free to investigate anyone who went to a
fund-raising party.

Those are not fanciful possibilities. Between 1981 and 1988, after the Reagan
Administration relaxed the Levi guidelines, the F.B.I. ran a massive political
spying and harassment operation against Americans who opposed U.S. intervention
in Nicaragua and El Salvador. Under the Clinton bill a President could easily
designate one side in any country's conflict as "terrorist," making its American
supporters criminal targets.

Punishing Americans for the peaceful expression of their political views is a
gross violation of the First Amendment. The amendment's "central meaning," the
Supreme Court has said, is freedom of political expression. The chairman of the
House Judiciary Committee, Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, a
conservative who cares deeply about freedom of speech, should take a
particularly hard look at this section of the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act.

Conservatives will play their historic role if they keep the country from
wounding itself in a rush to do something about terrorism. Senator Dole said in
New Hampshire the other day:

"This is America. This is not a police state. So we want to go very slowly and
make sure we do it right."

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              161 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Stefan T. Possony, 82, a Scholar Of International Security Affairs

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


Stefan T. Possony, a scholar of international security affairs who became an
influential academic strategist of the cold war, died on April 26 at his home in
Los Altos, Calif. He was 82.

He had suffered a paralyzing stroke in 1985 and was in failing health for the
past year, said his wife, Regina Golbinder Possony.

Mr. Possony worked as a civilian intelligence officer and analyst for the the
United States military during and after World War II. In 1961 he became a senior
fellow and director of international political studies at the Hoover Institution
on War, Revolution and Peace at Stanford University. He was given emeritus
status in 1985.

A student of power, strategy and political warfare, he was a prolific author.
Among his principal interests were international communism and what he
considered its efforts to undermine Western democracies.

In 1965, Congressional investigators asked him to testify on the radicalization
of the American campus in light of the student disorders at the University of
California at Berkeley. Communists, he told the lawmakers, had turned such
scenes into a "spectator sport," but said he doubted that they could control the
"radicalinskis" who had forced the pace.

Stefan Thomas Possony was born in Vienna and earned a doctorate in history and
economics at the University of Vienna. He left Austria for Paris in 1939 and
helped the French Air Force during the early months of World War II in Europe.

In 1940, he came to the United States and worked for naval intelligence. After
the war he served as a specialist on the Soviet Union and communism for the Air
Force and as a consultant to the Eisenhower Administration.

In 1965, he wrote a much-noted study urging a "forward strategy" to win the war
in Vietnam. Among other things, it proposed a commitment of "sufficient American
ground forces" to do "the necessary job."

He was the author of "A Century of Conflict: Communist Techniques of World
Revolution" (Regnery, 1953) and "A Forward Strategy for America," with Robert
Strausz-Hupe and William Kintner (Regnery, 1961), in which the authors expressed
their concern that the United States was losing the cold war.

Besides his wife, Mr. Possony is survived by a daughter, Andrea Ross; and a
sister, Christa Skoda Lanzinger, of Munich.

NAME: Stefan T. Possony

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stefan T. Possony (Sam Falk, 1970)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              162 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

John C. Bennett, a Theologian Of Outspoken Views, Dies at 92

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 625 words


The Rev. John C. Bennett, a theologian whose views on religion, politics and
social policy influenced American thinking for decades, died on Thursday at a
retirement community in Claremont, Calif. He was 92.

From 1963 to 1970, Mr. Bennett served as the 11th president of Union Theological
Seminary in New York City.

"He was an early supporter of feminism, an ardent champion of the civil rights
movement, an eloquent critic of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, a prophetic
supporter of economic rights for minorities," the Rev. Holland L. Hendrix,
current president of Union Theological Seminary, said yesterday. "All this far
in advance of the popularity of these movements."

Mr. Bennett was a key figure in the ecumenical, or Christian unity, movement. He
also made a lifelong study of Communism and repeatedly warned against turning
the cold war into a religious crusade. By doing so, he said in 1960, "we make
impossible the tolerance and humaneness which must yet come into international
relations if there is to be a future for mankind."

Widely regarded as a quick, precise speaker and skilled debater, he dismissed
the notion that his outspokenness was a violation of the separation of church
and state. "Church-state relations in the United States have never meant that
churchmen should separate their Christian ethics from political action," Mr.
Bennett said in 1966.

That was a time in which he was growing increasingly disturbed about American
involvement in Southeast Asia, so much so that he and Rabbi Abraham Heschel
formed Clergy and Laity Concerned About the Vietnam War. But Mr. Bennett,
ordained in the Congregational Church, was never a pacifist-above-all: in 1941,
he opposed American isolationism in the face of Nazi conquests and was a
co-founder with Reinhold Niebuhr of the magazine Christianity and Crisis.

John Coleman Bennett was born in Kingston, Ontario, the son of a Presbyterian
minister. He studied at Phillips Exeter Academy and Williams College and did
graduate studies at Oxford University in England and at Union Theological
Seminary.

Though he was commonly referred to as "Dr. Bennett" because of his many honorary
degrees ("five in one week from Catholic institutions," Dr. Hendrix recalled
yesterday), Mr. Bennett never received a doctorate. He held various religious
and teaching posts, joining the faculty of Union Theological Seminary, an
interdenominational institution in Morningside Heights, in 1943. He became dean
of the faculty in 1955 and was acting president for a brief time before assuming
the presidency.

In 1966, Mr. Bennett was instrumental in forging an agreement between the
seminary and Fordham University to pool professors, credits and library
resources for religious studies. The agreement was believed to be the first
contractual sharing of graduate resources in theology between a Protestant and
Catholic institution.

In 1970, Mr. Bennett was one of three theologians invited by the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee to testify on the war in Southeast Asia. "More than any
other theologian or moralist," Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota said
shortly afterward, "John Bennett knows how to put issues into historical, legal
and moral contexts which allow thinking politicians to make sound judgments."

Mr. Bennett's principal books were "Christian Ethics and Social Policy,"
published in 1946; "Christians and the State" (1948), and "Foreign Policy in
Christian Perspective" (1966). In retirement, he continued to write and lecture
and to condemn nuclear warfare.

Mr. Bennett's wife, Ann McGrew Bennett, died in 1986. He is survived by two
sons, John, of Claremont, Calif., and William, of Portland, Me., and a daughter,
Elizabeth Hemmer of Sacramento, Calif.

NAME: John C. Bennett

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John C. Bennett (William E. Sauro/The New York Times, 1969)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              163 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
From Darkly Powerful To Kinky, and Back

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C;   Page 20;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 621 words


Tomorrow at 10 P.M. on NBC, "Homicide: Life on the Street" reaches the end of
another season, its third, and the fate of the highly lauded series is still in
doubt. Developed by Paul Attanasio ("Quiz Show") from "Homicide: A Year on the
Killing Streets," David Simon's nonfiction book about a police homicide squad in
Baltimore, the show has gone through changes that have left even its staunchest
supporters skittish.

In the beginning, "Homicide" was dark and powerful, as its detectives prowled
the shadowy recesses of urban life. This was tough, raw television drama,
drenched in bitingly sarcastic humor. But apparently it was too raw for a good
many viewers. The ratings languished. The network started going to work on
changes. The humor began to get cute, especially in the subplot involving the
purchase of a restaurant by three of the detectives. Playing John Munch, the
comic Richard Belzer was reduced to obvious routines he would despise in his
stand-up club act.

Then scripts began to go unsettlingly kinky. An apex of sorts was reached with a
love affair that Detective Tim Bayliss (Kyle Secor) was required to pursue in a
casket, often with the lid closed. It began to seem as if "Homicide," with
company morale sagging, had decided on a suicide mission. Meanwhile, production
uncertainties frustrated the actors who, understandably, began to consider
commitments elsewhere. Some regular characters were noticeably absent, or
reduced to bit parts, on more and more episodes.

Now the good news. Over the last couple of months, "Homicide" has settled down
to at least a semblance of stability. The silly routines about the restaurant
continue, but the core plots have returned to serious business while keeping a
rein on outlandishness. What's more, the ratings have been inching up.
"Homicide" may have a future after all.

One good reason it should is tomorrow's episode, "The Gas Man." Getting out of
prison after six years, Victor (Bruno Kirby) hitches up with his old friend
Danny (Richard Edson) to go after the policeman who sent him away. The latter
turns out to be Frank Pembleton, the strongest character in the show's
outstanding ensemble cast thanks to a steadily electrifying performance by Andre
Braugher. Directed by the film maker Barry Levinson ("Rain Man"), one of the
executive producers of "Homicide," the hour zips smartly through a plot that
includes everything from a fertility clinic to a decapitated Gypsy psychic.

Mr. Kirby ("City Slickers") and Mr. Edson ("Do the Right Thing") manage to whip
up a friendship that is simultaneously goofy and touching. Both actors worked
previously with Mr. Levinson in "Good Morning, Vietnam." And Mr. Braugher has
made Pembleton one of prime time's most vivid presences, the kind of tough guy
you had better not cross when he says, "God reached down and graced the fool
with wisdom."

Now perhaps NBC will grace "Homicide" with a renewal.

The Gas Man
NBC, Fridays at 10
(Channel 4 in New York)

Barry Levinson and Tom Fontana, executive producers; Henry Bromell, co-executive
producer; created by Paul Attanasio; Gail Mutrux, producer; Jim Finnerty,
supervising producer; Jean De Segonzac, director of photography; Cindy Mollo and
Jay Rabinowitz, editors; Vince Peranio, production designer; produced by
Baltimore Pictures, SL/TMF Productions and MCEG Sterling in association with NBC
Productions.

WITH: Daniel Baldwin (Detective Felton), Ned Beatty (Detective Bolander),
Richard Belzer (Detective Munch), Andre Braugher (Detective Pembleton), Clark
Johnson (Detective Lewis), Yaphet Kotto (Lieutenant Giardello), Melissa Leo
(Detective Howard), Kyle Secor (Detective Bayliss) and Isabella Hoffman
(Lieutenant Russert).

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bruno Kirby and Richard Edson in "Homicide: Life on the
Streets." (Gerry Goodstein/NBC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              164 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B;   Page 2;   Column 5;   Style Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


MARY ANN VECCHIO GILLUM, whose agonized face became the symbol of an era when
she was photographed at the Ohio National Guard shootings at Kent State
University, had the second of two momentous meetings with a figure connected to
that event yesterday.

Last week, Mrs. Gillum met John Filo, the photographer who snapped the
photograph of her kneeling by Jeffrey Miller, one of four Kent State students
shot to death by the Guard on May 4, 1970, during protests against the Vietnam
War and the bombing of Cambodia. A teen-age runaway, she had stumbled onto the
scene.

Yesterday, she met ELAINE HOLSTEIN, Mr. Miller's mother. Both women had returned
to the university for a two-day commemoration of the event. Mrs. Gillum was also
in a play last night called "Kent State: A Requiem," by J. Gregory Payne, a
professor at Emerson College in Boston.

"Dr. Payne introduced us," Mrs. Gillum said. "We were scared, but we held hands,
we hugged each other, we cried. We didn't know what to say, so we just hugged
each other till we could say something." When Mrs. Gillum finally spoke, she
said, "I just said I was so sorry."

Mrs. Holstein was equally moved by the encounter. "That picture had been
haunting me for years, and I was afraid to meet her," she said. "I'm glad I
finally did and that she's O.K. She suffered from this, too."   NADINE BROZAN


LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              165 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Kent State After 25 Years

SECTION: Section A;   Page 14;   Column 4;   National Desk

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: About 3,000 people attended a memorial service at Kent State
University in Kent, Ohio, yesterday to mark the day 25 years ago that the Ohio
National Guard opened fire and killed four students during a protest of American
policy in Vietnam. Pictures of the four were displayed in front of the podium.
(Daniel Levin for The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              166 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

For Westmoreland, L.I. Parade Honors

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;   Page 5;   Column 6;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

DATELINE: MINEOLA, L.I., May 4


Gen. William C. Westmoreland will be the guest of honor at a parade and ceremony
in Nassau County on May 13 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the fall of
Saigon, county officials announced today.

The parade, on Charles Lindbergh Boulevard at Mitchel Field in Uniondale, will
be the New York area's largest observance of the end of the Vietnam War,
according to its sponsors, the Long Island chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of
America.

General Westmoreland, a retired four-star general, was the commander of all
ground forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

"The event will give all of us the opportunity to honor those who served, and
came home from Vietnam, and to remember those who did not," said the County
Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta.

The parade is to begin at 11 A.M. at the Nassau Community College parking lot.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              167 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section D;   Page 17;   Column 1;   Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1309 words



Multimedia Hesitation

Will multimedia titles ever be a staple in video stores? Games of the cartridge
variety from Sega and Nintendo are popular items in video outlets, but for the
most part traditional video dealers are hesitant about CD-ROM's and other new
kinds of games and titles for computers and set-top systems like CD-I and 3DO.
Many video people are put off by the many formats, but the aversion is actually
more basic.

"These guys spent 15 years programming America that you rent entertainment,"
said Jim McCullaugh, co-author with Chris McGowan of the book "Entertainment in
the Cyber Zone," published last week by Random House. Multimedia distributors
want to sell their wares, not rent them.

Nevertheless, Mr. McCullaugh said, multimedia should catch on in video stores.
"They have all that traffic," he pointed out. "Why send people down the street
to a computer store?" Many video stores will rent titles as well as sell them,
and rentals, he added, help people learn before they purchase.

In their book, Mr. McCullaugh, the editor of Multimedia Merchandising magazine,
and Mr. McGowan, a writer for Billboard and other publications, explore all the
multimedia formats. Mr. McCullaugh said the purpose is to educate the neophyte.

Consumer knowledge, or the lack of it, has been a problem in the relatively few
video stores that do carry multimedia titles. Last year, Blockbuster ran a
multimedia test promotion in 57 stores in the San Francisco area. The company
won't give details of the results, but only 15 of the stores are still in the
program. Nevertheless, Blockbuster has expanded the promotion to 35 other stores
across the country and in Canada. Since the chain has more than 2,000 stores,
its approach to multimedia might be called extremely cautious.

"We went into every kind of demographic situation to see what is successful,"
said Michael van der Kieft, the director of business development for Blockbuster
Entertainment. Again, the company won't divulge details, but the two most
important factors, he said, were the numbers of people coming into the store and
their level of affluence.

During the San Francisco test, customers complained about packaging that didn't
adequately list the specifications needed to play multimedia titles. Mr. van der
Kieft said that consumers are still reporting problems but have generally become
more knowledgeable about CD-ROM and multimedia titles. Better packaging helps.
"It's become much clearer," he said.


'Seduction' Seduction

"I saw the movie and fell in love with it," Gene Silverman said. "And I knew it
would be a terrific video." As president of Polygram Home Video, Mr. Silverman
was in a position to do something about that, so he went out and secured the
video rights for "The Last Seduction," John Dahl's acclaimed noir thriller
starring Linda Fiorentino and Bill Pullman.

Like "Red Rock West," an earlier highly praised Dahl film, "The Last Seduction"
had theater runs in Europe but, at first, no bites from American distributors.
Also like "Red Rock West," the film appeared first on HBO. After that it had a
run in 167 theaters and made almost $6 million at the box office. Polygram plans
to release the tape on June 27.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Mary Shelley's Frankenstein
1994. Columbia Tri-Star. $98.32. Laser disk, $39.95. 123 minutes. Closed
captioned. R. Release date: Tuesday.

The skilled Shakespearean adapter Kenneth Branagh ("Henry V" and "A Midsummer
Night's Dream") directs himself as Victor Frankenstein, the godlike young
scientist bound for destruction. Here, though, Mr. Branagh is unable to give
fresh impact to a tale overexposed by pop culture and ends up with more of a
Gothic fairy tale than a horror film. "This is a bland, no-fault 'Frankenstein'
for the 90's," Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times, "short on villainy but
loaded with the tragically misunderstood."

The War
1994. MCA/Universal. $95.92. Laser disk, $39.98. 126 minutes. Closed captioned.
PG-13.

In Jon Avnet's allegory about family love and the wounds of Vietnam, Stephen
(Kevin Costner) returns from the war but has trouble adjusting to civilian life
in Juliette, Miss. There to help him carry on are his wife (Mare Winningham) and
11-year-old twins (Elijah Wood and Lexi Randall), and as long as the story stays
with these elements, the focus is clear. But then a neighborhood war breaks out
over an elaborate treehouse, and as the animosity escalates, so do the plot
twists in a film with "a wider array of lessons than it can comfortably handle"
(Maslin).

That Obscure Object of Desire
1977. Home Vision. $29.95. 100 minutes. French with English subtitles. No
rating.

Luis Bunuel mixes the effervescence and gaiety of "The Discreet Charm of the
Bourgeoise" and the dark wit of "Tristana" into his own "Don Giovanni." With
society self-destructing around him, the charming, worldly Mathieu (Fernando
Rey) singlemindedly pursues the lovely Conchita, a girlfriend who proves so
complicated that it takes two actresses to play her. There is the cool,
enigmatic Conchita (Carole Bouquet) and the hot, flamenco-dancing Conchita
(Angela Molina). But poor Mathieu never succeeds in identifying or catching up
with either in Bunuel's surreal "vision of a world as logical as a theorem,
mysterious as a dream and as funny as a vaudeville gag" (Vincent Canby).

Double Dragon
1994. MCA/Universal. $95.92. Laser disk, $34.98. 96 minutes. Closed captioned.
PG-13.

Here's a film that plays very much like the video game on which it is based. In
the year 2007, an earthquake-ravaged Los Angeles is a post-apocalyptic skeleton,
with gangs of steroid-inflated thugs in the streets and the citizenry requiring
periodic hits of oxygen from curbside dispensers to survive the sulfurous
atmosphere. So who should come whistling along in their garbage-fueled vehicle
but those kick-fighting Lee brothers (Mark Dacascos and Scott Wolf), ready to
contest the evil Koga Shuko (Robert Patrick) over control of the city and hold
up their end of an "incoherent children's adventure" (Stephen Holden).

FROM YEARS PAST

From 'Bride of' to 'Son of,'
To Mel Brooks and Gene Wilder

In addition to the original "Frankenstein" (MCA/Universal, $14.98), the 1931
classic with Boris Karloff, there are more than 30 other films related to the
creature. Here are some on tape. All but "Young Frankenstein" are priced at
$14.98, released by MCA/Universal and are unrated.

THE BRIDE OF FRANKENSTEIN. Elsa Lancaster is brought in to cheer up the monster,
who doesn't take to that suggestion but in a famous scene does temporarily
befriend a blind hermit. 1935. 75 minutes.

SON OF FRANKENSTEIN. The doctor's son (Basil Rathbone) tries to lighten up the
reputation of the monster (Karloff, in his last appearance in the role) with the
help of Ygor (Bela Lugosi), who has his own agenda. 1939. 95 minutes.

THE GHOST OF FRANKENSTEIN. In the sequel to "Son of," some serious surgery gets
done as Ygor (Bela Lugosi) donates his brain to the monster (Lon Chaney Jr.),
who responds none too graciously. 1942. 68 minutes.

FRANKENSTEIN MEETS THE WOLF MAN. In a battle of titans, Bela Lugosi (in another
break from vampire roles) is Dr. Frankenstein and Chaney the wolf man, who was
actually only trying to look up the doctor to cure his condition but has to
tangle with the monster instead. 1943. 72 minutes.

HOUSE OF FRANKENSTEIN. Even Dracula gets into the act as Karloff (as a
scientist), J. Carroll Naish and Chaney team up in a rambling monster bash with
no point, but it's fun nevertheless. 1944. 71 minutes.

YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN. Mel Brooks is in Transylvania, where Gene Wilder is the mad
doctor, Marty Feldman a crazed lab assistant and Peter Boyle a debonair monster
in top hat and tails. 1974. Fox. $19.98. 106 minutes. PG.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              168 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Shooting From the Lip

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


Talk radio is in an uproar about G. Gordon Liddy. One of the medium's prime
yakmeisters, Liddy incensed many colleagues by advising his audience on how to
shoot vexatious agents of the Federal Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms police.

Liddy's advice: Aim for the head. Why the head? Their upper torsos are likely to
be protected by bulletproof vests.

Several talk-show hosts immediately denounced Liddy for ignorance. Head shots,
they pointed out, are easy to miss. For a sure shot, they said, Liddy's audience
should aim at the abdomen, below the bulletproof-vestline, as it were.

Liddy admitted he had been mistaken, and the matter might have ended right there
but for the fact that it is not A.T.F. agents whom talk-radio audiences are most
interested in shooting.

Talk-radio hosts were immediately besieged with calls for advice on what part of
an Internal Revenue agent to aim for.

The hosts' consensus favored the kneecaps. Though admittedly a tough shot, if
successful it would result in prolonged suffering and, with luck, permanent
crippling.

A few suggested that listeners leave their guns holstered when confronting an
I.R.S. agent and use a baseball bat on his kneecaps. This, observed one
misguided host, eliminated any risk that the outraged citizen could be
accidentally shot by one of his own bullets ricocheting off a Government
shinbone.

These words had barely rolled off the host's tongue before outraged callers
swamped his phone bank to point out that bullets don't ricochet, people do.

The host's situation became perilous when callers started shouting that his
preference for baseball-bat kneecapping showed he was an unpatriotic gun-control
freak, possibly even a liberal.

Caller after caller reminded him that the Constitution clearly specified the
right to bear arms for whatever purpose they might be borne, including
kneecapping if power-mad I.R.S. people became testy about your rights. But, they
reminded him, there is no constitutional right whatsoever to bear bats.

At this stage, three other talk shows in the area began receiving calls for
advice on which part to aim for when shooting a talk-show host.

By this time, of course, half the population wanted to be heard on the subject
of how various human pests could be most effectively shot.

The other half wanted to argue about whether there was a First Amendment right
to issue shooting tips on the radio, and if not, why not, and if so, who had the
right to suggest who should be shot and was there a limit on the size of the
firearm that could be recommended, and so on.

Famous media pronouncers took to television and newsprint not only to pronounce,
but also to denounce each other as well as the exasperating President and the
ineffable Gingrich, and anybody else who wandered through their intellectual
gunsights, for saying yes it was fine to give shooting tips, or no it was not
fine at all, and -- Oh yeah, wise guy? -- what about the Vietnam protesters of
the 1960's? and -- So's your old man, you klutz! -- what about the Palmer raids
under Woodrow Wilson, etc.

In short, relief was enjoyed by all the usual gasbags of formal as well as
informal media at just the precise moment when they were about to scream with
the boredom coming off the O. J. Simpson trial. Now they could scream with
delight, wonderfully blood-stirring fury and exhilarating mindlessness about --
of all things -- radio.

Radio was pronounced kaput 40 years ago, and is now so widely regarded as the
boob's medium that Newt Gingrich's Republican populists clamor for an end of
government support for quality broadcasting on ground that it's a luxury for a
spoiled elite.

Yet there was once intelligence and even wit on the kind of radio now ruled by
gab. It produced brilliant entertainers like Jack Benny, who gave new meaning to
the words "I'm thinking," and Fred Allen, who could come up with lines like:
"You can take all the sincerity in Hollywood and put it in the navel of a flea
and have room left over for an agent's heart and a caraway seed."

Hey Gordo, where's the best place to aim when shooting a guy like that?

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              169 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON LANGUAGE;
Goo-Goo Eyes

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 32;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words


DEMOCRATS WANT an outside goo-goo to determine the standards of right and
wrong," I wrote in a recent piece about the ethics of Speaker Newt Gingrich.
"But internal goo-goos are elected to do that job, guided by the public's sense
of right and wrong."

That struck some readers as an ethnic slur.

"When I was growing up in San Francisco 60 years ago," writes William G.
Ackerman of San Rafael, Calif., "some of the guys referred to Filipinos as
goo-goos." And "Back when I was in high school," writes Francis G. Hutchinson of
Redwood City, Calif., "I had a friend of Filipino ancestry, for which I was from
some quarters scorned for chumming around 'with that goo-goo.' Move me forward
in the lingo. Is it now a term for guru? Or goofball? Or an infantile person?"

The slur they have in mind is gook, of unknown origin, reported first by
American Speech in 1935 to mean "anyone who speaks Spanish, particularly a
Filipino," and was later used in South Korea and Vietnam to denigrate all
nonwhites. (The return slur by Asians, based on slant-eyed, leading to the noun
slants, is round-eyed.)

A goo-goo is decidedly not a gook. Goo! is the sound often made by a satisfied
baby, and it became part of imitative baby talk. Reduplicated, it came to mean
"loving, enticing," as used in the phrase goo-goo eyes, and was turned into a
verb by Mark Twain in "Huckleberry Finn": "The duke . . . just went a goo-gooing
around, happy and satisfied."

The word may have been influenced by goggle, "to stare with eyes bugged out,"
which was then caricatured in a comic strip, "Barney Google," by Billy De Beck
in 1918, and was further popularized in 1923 by the impresario and songwriter
Billy Rose in "Barney Google, with the goo-goo-googley eyes."

The political term, goo-goo, began in New York in the 1890's after the City Club
began to form district-level Good Government Clubs to press for reform.

The New York Sun dubbed the Good Government types Goo-Goos, a term of derision
that was picked up by Theodore Roosevelt: "The Republican machine men have been
loudly demanding a straight ticket; and those prize idiots, the Goo-Goos, have
just played into their hands by capering off and nominating an independent
ticket of their own."

Influenced by an older term, goody-goody, goo-goo has lost its capitals as a
shortening of Good Government. It is now used in affectionate derogation of
reformers and ethicists.


Would-Be Assassin

"While I don't wish to turn the shooting of a man into a mere grammatical
issue," writes Richard S. Kaufman, a copy editor at the Book-of-the-Month Club
in New York, "I was puzzled by a phrase in an article about former Gov. George
Wallace's injuries at the hands of 'a would-be assassin.' " Mr. Kaufman points
to a 1958 book, "Watch Your Language," by Theodore M. Bernstein, who was then
The New York Times's guardian of the language. Bernstein wrote: "An assassin is
a person who either kills or tries to kill treacherously. Thus, for all
practical purposes there is no such thing as a 'would-be assassin.' "

Bernstein based his usage judgment on the Oxford English Dictionary's definition
of assassin: "One who undertakes to put another to death by treacherous
violence." Undertakes denotes "tries," and would make would-be assassin
redundant.

Let's see how two of the newest dictionaries define the noun. The Random House
Webster's College Dictionary (which has such current terms as bad hair day,
control freak, family leave, Generation X, mondegreen and no-brainer) defines
assassin as "a murderer, esp. one who kills a politically prominent person for
fanatical or monetary reasons."

The Cambridge International Dictionary of English, which ranges across American,
British and Australian English (and has a nice way of listing each sense
separately -- bollocks, for example, has one definition for "body part" and
another for "nonsense"), similarly defines assassin as "a murderer, esp. one who
kills a famous or important person for political reasons or in exchange for
money." Again, no suggestion that the assassin is anything other than one who
has completed his mission of murder.

Usage has changed in these four decades. Probably because the noun assassination
has long meant a completed act of murder, assassin is now its successful
perpetrator -- and would-be and intended are legitimate modifiers for one who
tries but fails to hit the target.

Ted Bernstein, whose 1965 "Careful Writer" is still a useful usage dictionary,
is not spinning in his grave: he knew that all usage diktats are snapshots in
time.

$40 Word

Our search for the origin of $40 word is progressing.

The construction is in active use. Oliver Conant, an English teacher in New
York, chastising me for using argumentation when argument or reasoning would
suffice, notes that he looks to this column as "a solecism and obfuscation free
zone" and not "as a place where I'm likely to stumble across verbal imprecision
or the use of $50 words."

The price, of course, keeps inflating. Eric Widing of North Salem, N.Y., found
the phrase selling for half price in William Strunk Jr. and E. B. White's 1959
"Elements of Style": "Avoid the elaborate, the pretentious, the coy and the
cute. Do not be tempted by a twenty dollar word when there is a ten-center
handy, ready and able."

But here's a clue to the etymon, from Robert Goldman of New Rochelle, N.Y.:
"Your reference to a '$40 word' evoked a fuzzy recollection of a radio program
called 'Paul Wing's Spelling Bee,' where dollar values (none of which approached
$40) were assigned to words."

The scent has been picked up; the hunt continues.

Hyphenated Heritage

We could tell that the Republican candidate Pat Buchanan was reaching out to
Jewish voters when he amended Christian values to Judeo-Christian values.

Comes now the Rev. Donald L. Roberts, president of Goodwill Industries-Manasota
Inc., before the Senate Finance Committee: "I would be less than responsive to
my high calling if I did not daily remind myself and others of the words of our
Judeo-Christian-Islamic heritage that justice should roll down like waters."

Notes Daniel Patrick Moynihan, ranking Democrat on Finance: "It's now official.
Ours is a Judeo-Christian-Islamic heritage."

If anybody feels left out, we've got some more hyphens.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              170 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 7, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   2   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2      2  62   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 3      5   2   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 4      3  46   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 5      8   5   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 6      4  11   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 7      6   2   CHILDREN OF THE JEDI, by Barbara Hambly. (Spectra/Bantam,
                $21.95.) The "Star Wars" New Republic sends a mission to find
                long-lost people.

 8      7   5   A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy,
                a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.

 9     10  143  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 10    14  29   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 11     9   8   OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny
                and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold-war
                era.

 12         3   THE FOURTH PROCEDURE, by Stanley Pottinger. (Ballantine,
                $23.95.) A Congressman's romances, the abortion wars and
                medical mayhem.

 13    11   9   THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The
                unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish
                town.

 14         1   THE CAROUSEL, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $23.95.) Compulsion
                and revenge threaten the survival of a family dynasty noted for
                its charity and respectability.

 15    12   7   PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four
                poems celebrating women.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   2   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The Secretary of Defense
                under Kennedy and Johnson ruefully recalls his role in the
                Vietnam War.

 2      2  30   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 3      4  12   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 4      6  19   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 5      7  61   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6     10   3   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 7      3   3   QUIVERS, by Robin Quivers. (Regan Books/HarperCollins, $22.)
                The memoirs of Howard Stern's sidekick.

 8*     5   8   BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus.
                (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving
                champion.

 9          1   MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                actress reminisces about her four decades in Hollywood.

 10*    8   6   THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank. Edited by Otto H.
                Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive
                edition."

 11     9  35   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage.

 12         2   IN SEARCH OF STONES, by M. Scott Peck. (Hyperion, $22.95.) A
                search for ancient monuments in Britain becomes an odyssey in
                quest of faith and reason.

 13    14   2   MODEL, by Michael Gross. (Morrow, $25.) The growth of modeling
                from a small business into a huge industry.

 14        17   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 15    12  72   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      4   7   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 2      2  102  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      1   4   MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Maintaining passion.

 4          1   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 22, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

EDMUND WILSON: A Biography, by Jeffrey Meyers. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin,
$35.) Lively, shapely and evocative, this book offers insights into Wilson's
public and private lives that Wilson, despite his own autobiographical writings,
lacked the introspection to achieve.

EXCELLENT CADAVERS: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic, by
Alexander Stille. (Pantheon, $27.50.) This fascinating and horrifying
examination, based on immense piles of documents, shows how in the last 25 years
the Mafia has terrorized Sicilian society and perverted Italian politics.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly
unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who
narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.

MEN IN BLACK, by Scott Spencer. (Knopf, $23.) A smart, affectionate comic novel
in which an honorable but unsuccessful novelist's life is overturned when his
pseudonymous potboiler about extraterrestrials becomes a best seller.

A MOMENT ON THE EARTH: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism, by Gregg
Easterbrook. (Viking, $27.95.) Essays on the most complex of modern subjects,
treating our considerable environmental accomplishments and our puzzling neglect
of threats (diseases, for instance) in other people's backyards.

NANO. The Emerging Science of Nanotechnology: Remaking the World -- Molecule by
Molecule, by Ed Regis. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) Crisp science journalism about a
possible world of endless bounty, produced by incredibly tiny machines.

NOAH'S CHOICE: The Future of Endangered Species, by Charles C. Mann and Mark L.
Plummer. (Knopf, $24.) The authors persuasively contend that humans will decide,
by default or by intention, who goes extinct, and at present have not a clue how
to do so wisely.

OSWALD'S TALE: An American Mystery, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.)
Stoked by a passion to believe J.F.K.'s death was more than a meaningless
absurdity, Mr. Mailer pursues and delivers the assassin's very slightly
significant soul, using his own research and that of others.

REDEYE: A Western, by Clyde Edgerton. (Algonquin, $17.95.) An elaborate,
unbelievable plot, chock-full of believable, well-developed characters, sustains
this woolly western by an admirable Southern novelist.

THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE: A Novel of the Limehouse Murders, by Peter Ackroyd.
(Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) A claustrophobic, agitated novel of London in
1880; everyone (including a clutch of famous contemporary reformers) is
connected to everyone else.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              171 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
Springsteen Looks Back but Keeps Walking On

BYLINE: By NEIL STRAUSS

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2409 words


"BROOOOOOOCE!" So went the cries of nearly a dozen police officers as Bruce
Springsteen walked past the 18th Precinct station house on West 54th Street. As
he strolled through midtown Manhattan on a sunny weekday afternoon, no other
pedestrians stopped him or yodeled his first name. They just looked at him as he
passed by, trying to quietly absorb his presence with their gaze in the jaded
way that New Yorkers respond to fame. It was only the police officers who
reacted, pulling out their summons pads for Mr. Springsteen to sign and yelling,
"You're the best!" as he complied.

"I have a healthy fan base in law enforcement," Mr. Springsteen, 45, said with a
staccato laugh as he turned on to Eighth Avenue, beginning one of the few
interviews he has granted during his two-decade career, which has recently taken
yet another upswing.

Rock musicians and police officers aren't supposed to mix. It's a tradition that
goes back to the day the blues musician Robert Johnson went to the crossroads
and supposedly made a deal with the Devil. But since Mr. Springsteen emerged
from Asbury Park, N. J., in the early 1970's, firing off hit songs like "Born to
Run," "Hungry Heart" and, more recently, "Streets of Philadelphia," he has
changed the rules of rebellion.

He imbued the daily struggles of those in the working class with a quotidian
heroism, telling them that they mattered and assuring them that there was
nothing wrong with trying to realize a dream, even if their attempt failed.
"Spend your life waiting for a moment that just don't come," he sings in
"Badlands," a 1978 song on his newly released "Greatest Hits" album on Columbia.
"Well, don't waste your time waiting."

"A lot of rock-and-roll music was concerned with the outlaw," Mr. Springsteen
said. "But I liked the idea of 'High Noon' and the ambivalent sheriff. My
characters were people who had something to be gained and lost by stepping in
either direction. They were misfits more than outlaws."

Since Mr. Springsteen's heyday in the early and mid-1980's, times have changed
-- and so has Mr. Springsteen. In 1989, he divorced his first wife, the model
Julianne Phillips, and started dating the woman who would become his second,
Patti Scialfa, a member of his backup group, the E Street Band. That same year,
he dismissed the band and, in 1990, bought his third home, a $14 million estate
in Beverly Hills (he also has a farm near his hometown, Freehold, N. J., and a
house in nearby Rumson).

For fans who saw Mr. Springsteen as one of the few rock stars who hadn't
forgotten what it was like to be a regular human being, these actions were
confusing. The relative lack of enthusiasm with which fans and critics greeted
his 1992 albums, "Human Touch" and "Lucky Town," led some to wonder how relevant
Mr. Springsteen was in the 90's.

But in the past year, the pendulum has started to swing in Mr. Springsteen's
direction again. He received four Grammys and an Oscar for his title song to the
movie "Philadelphia," reunited with the E Street Band to record six additional
songs for "Greatest Hits" (three of which ended up on the record) and watched
the album shoot to No. 1 on the pop charts the week it was released. Its first
new hit, a previously unreleased 1982 song called "Murder Incorporated," about
the proliferation of guns and the devaluation of human life, sounds even more
appropriate today than it did when it was written.

"I BELIEVE THAT THE BASIC IDEAS and the values that I wrote into all those songs
on the album are still relevant," Mr. Springsteen said. "When I wrote them, I
wanted to write about things that people always have to go through at some point
in their lives. My music wasn't going to be about fashion or style. It was going
to be about family and struggle and identity questions, spiritual questions: Who
am I? Where am I going? How do you live an honest life, and is it possible? How
do you make the kinds of connections that keep you from the worst of yourself
and bring out the best of yourself?  And then there's fun and good times -- how
do you find them?"

During that afternoon walk, Mr. Springsteen had his choice of good times: he
could find them in Central Park or he could find them in Hannah's Cocktail
Lounge, a few blocks from the police station. It took two seconds for Mr.
Springsteen to choose the latter. He settled into a table near the window in the
front of the small, empty bar, then changed his mind. He wanted a table in the
back corner, where no sunlight penetrated. His age didn't show in his ruddy
cheeks, tousled dark hair, husky frame and cross-shaped earring. "If anybody
could make you dream, it's Bruce Springsteen," says Melissa Etheridge, who
models her impassioned performances after Mr. Springsteen's. But on that day, he
seemed more ready to shatter dreams than inspire them.

He downed a shot of tequila, took a sip from his beer chaser and talked about
his recent metamorphosis. Having children -- Evan James, 4, Jessica Rae, 3, and
Sam Ryan, 1 -- pulled him out of his solipsistic world, he said, and not just
because he now has to wake up every morning at 8:30 and drive the two oldest to
school in his black Ford Explorer.

"I think that before I had kids I was waiting for my life to begin," he said.
"It was always, 'When this happens, when that happens.' And all of a sudden one
morning I woke up and that feeling was just gone. It felt to me like the
beginning of some life that I had worked really hard and waited very long to get
to. I was 40 years old when I had kids, and so I was already at the point where
the interesting things for me felt like they were going to be over there -- away
from bars and running around -- and closer to children and relationships and
deeper satisfactions."

On "Greatest Hits," one can hear these changes taking place. It begins with
visions of freedom and the open road in "Born to Run," matures with the
35-year-old father in "My Hometown" who knows he's lying to himself when he
talks of packing his bags and escaping, and ends with the fatalistic wisdom of
"Blood Brothers," a song about the E Street Band. In his slightly hoarse voice
he sings, "The hardness of this world slowly grinds your dreams away, making a
fool's joke out of the promises we make."

"The songs are not literally autobiographical," he said. "But in some way
they're emotionally autobiographical. As they go by, you see your own take on
the world and how it's changed since you were a kid. You create a variety of
different characters, and the thing they have in common is some emotional thread
you've tried to use to make your own way through what can feel like a
particularly imponderable existence."

Songs have not always been enough for Mr. Springsteen to help him weave his way
through life. One of the biggest steps he ever had to take, he said, was 13
years ago, when he decided to undergo therapy, which he continues sporadically.
"I grew up in a working-class family, where that was frowned upon," he said. "It
was very, very difficult for me to ever get to a place where I said I needed
some help. I stumbled into some different, very dark times where I simply had no
other idea of what to do. It's not necessarily for everybody, but all I can say
is, I've accomplished things personally that felt simply impossible previously.
The leap of consciousness that it takes to go from playing in your garage to
playing in front of 5,000, 6,000, 7,000 people or when you experience any kind
of success at all can be very, very demanding."

Mr. Springsteen has made the transition from garage-rocker to arena-rocker
better than most rock singers. He doesn't have to try to be sincere; it comes
naturally. In the 1970's, at the height of rock-star decadence, Mr. Springsteen
set himself apart from his contemporaries by rarely indulging in anything but a
sweaty, energetic three- or four-hour show. In the 1990's, it's now in vogue for
rockers to resent their large following, but Mr. Springsteen continues to
embrace his wholeheartedly. His vision from the beginning was that the band
should be a fan's rock group. In fact, "Murder Incorporated" was included on
"Greatest Hits" solely because of one fan's persistence.

"For years, there's this guy that's been following me around with a 'Murder
Incorporated' sign," Mr. Springsteen said. "I see him in the audience like every
five shows. I have never played the song, ever, in concert and would have no
intent to do so, and yet this guy follows me around with this sign and flashes
it during the entire show. So it was he who I had in mind when we put the song
on the album. We said, 'Let's put this on for that guy, whoever he is.' "

In the introduction to a book about Mr. Springsteen, one fan describes his idol
in bold capital letters as "real." Mr. Springsteen prefers the word "grounded,"
but real is what comes to mind when one meets him. Sitting at Hannah's Cocktail
Lounge, he came on like a good-natured lumberjack ready to chop down the trees
that separate him from his audience. He urged on the conversation with lines
like "Let's not stop now" and ordered new beers every time one started to get
warm. He seemed ready to talk about each subject for an hour or two -- if only
to avoid an awkward silence.

The topic Mr. Springsteen constantly returned to was the E Street Band, which
has been with him through his best years. A poet in auto mechanic's clothing, he
was first signed to a record label during the tail end of the Nixon years; he
and the band were one of the few groups in a politically cynical time that still
thought rock could change the world. Mr. Springsteen and the band's fame peaked
during the Reagan 1980's, when they gave voice to those grasping for a
meaningful life in a system that did not seem to value them. Now that
Congressional Republicans are trying to undo 60 years of social reform, perhaps
there's no better time for Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band to return and
let those blue-collar voices be heard from again.

"It's very strange that the Republicans are coming back now," Mr. Springsteen
said. "Because my idea in the early and mid-1980's was to put forth an alternate
vision of the America that was being put forth by the Reagan-era Republicans.
They basically tried to co-opt every image that was American, including me. I
wanted to stake my own claim to those images, and put forth my own ideas about
them. The band drew me in that direction, and that's the direction that I want
to work in in the future with them."

Mr. Springsteen's reunion with the E Street Band, whom he hasn't recorded with
in 10 years, is not just symbolic. In his view, people perceived his solo work,
on albums like "Nebraska," "Tunnel of Love" and "Lucky Town," as very personal
and psychological. The E Street Band, he said, is like a bridge connecting him
with his fans, broadening the scope of his writing. Equally important, he said
the band's easy camaraderie keeps him from slipping into what he called "the
abyss of self-destructiveness."

A prolific songwriter but notoriously slow when it comes to releasing records,
Mr. Springsteen, nonetheless, wants to finish recording a solo album in the next
few weeks and record an album with the band this summer. He hopes to change his
relationship with the band. "I simply want to do both things, like what Neil
Young does with Crazy Horse," he explained. "He'll go and do a project with
different musicians, and then he'll come back and play with Crazy Horse when he
has something that feels right for them."

Steve Van Zandt, the guitarist who left the E Street Band in 1984 but has now
rejoined it, said that Mr. Springsteen's plan seemed like a good idea. "We
talked about it years ago," he said. "I really felt that was the way to go."

In addition to the new songs on the "Greatest Hits" album, Mr. Springsteen also
recently completed a song for the Sean Penn film "The Crossing Guard" and wrote
for and helped produce a forthcoming album by Joe Grushecky, a Pittsburgh rock
musician. The thrill of playing blues guitar with the roots-rock band Blasters
at a recent concert of theirs, he said, has led him to start "toying around with
the idea of making a record that's centered around loud guitars." He has also
been listening to the punk band Social Distortion and Wayne Kramer, the former
guitarist with the proto-punk group MC5.

MR. SPRINGSTEEN IS LESS enthusiastic about the Grammy and Academy Awards he
recently won for "Streets of Philadelphia." "I didn't win any awards for so
long, so I devalued them because it was necessary," he said, guffawing so hard
that his shoulders shook. "Those are pretty conservative organizations, and all
the actual rock records I've made over the years have been ignored. But I had a
nice night at the Oscars, and I was really sort of appreciative, and my mother
came and got to see me win instead of lose. In the early 1980's, we did a
benefit for the Vietnam Veterans Association, and all the guys gave me a helmet
that they had signed. So I think that was the nicest award I've ever received."

Growing older has enabled Mr. Springsteen to look back at his past with
perspective and, at times, curiosity. In "Thunder Road," recorded in 1975, the
protagonist tries to explain to the woman he is speaking to that she is not too
old to escape her dead-end life. "So you're scared and you're thinking that
maybe we ain't that young anymore," he tells her.

"I was 24 when I wrote that," Mr. Springsteen said, pausing to laugh at himself.
"I listen to that now and think, 'Hey, wait a minute.' It's really strange, that
line, and the one in 'Rosalita' -- 'Someday we'll look back on this, and it will
all seem funny.' Those were two good ones, you know. I have no idea where I was
conceivably coming from at that time."

Mr. Springsteen can make fun of his songs and ambition now. But the truth is, he
tried to make music and plan his career so that he would regret nothing: "I
didn't want to be rocking on my porch when I was 70 years old going, 'Oh, man, I
should have taken a shot at this.' "

When it was pointed out to him that in an interview he did three years ago, he
used the same image about sitting on his porch, but that the age he mentioned
was 60 instead of 70, he laughed again. "There you go," he said. "The older you
get, the younger you are. At 60, I plan to be still doing it. We're moving it up
as we go. It will be 80 in another five years."

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bruce Springsteen during the filming of a video in Los Angeles
-- "My music wasn't going to be about fashion or style," he says. "It was going
to be about family and struggle and identity questions." (Neal Preston)(pg. 30)

Drawing (Al Hirschfeld)(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              172 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 18; Column 4; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1363 words



FACES ON EXHIBITION

"Faces," the 20th anniversary photography exhibition on view through June 17 at
the Pelham Art Center, contains 70 portraits of Americans, some candid, some
formal, by 25 masters of the camera. The artistry of the photographers and the
worthiness of the subjects make for a fascinating browse through the sea of
visages.

Hillary Rodham Clinton and the Rev. Jesse Jackson were caught in unguarded
moments by Larry Fink, while Pete Seeger and Helen Hayes posed for Susi Dugaw.
Bill Cosby and Leonard Bernstein, Linda Evans and Sarah Vaughan peer from the
walls alongside anonymous people who command attention for their own sakes or
because they send some fundamental message about our society.

Renata Rainer was the curator of the show, and among the many well-known artists
whose pictures she chose are Annie Liebovitz, Robert Mapplethorpe, Arnold
Newman, Steve Sherman and Claire Yaffa.

The center, at 155 Fifth Avenue in Pelham, is open Tuesdays through Fridays from
10 A.M. to 5 P.M., Saturdays from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Admission is free. Call
738-2525 for more information.

PLANTS WITH PRICES

When the Garden Club of Irvington-on-Hudson holds its annual plant sale, it has
something special to offer. As official tender of the Lyndhurst Rose Garden, it
can sell annuals and perennials grown from seed or cuttings in Lyndhurst's
greenhouse. It also combs the gardens of its members for prized young perennials
to dig up and put on sale. In addition, there will be a selection of hanging
plants and decorative patio plants.

The sale will be held next Saturday from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M. at the Lyndhurst
greenhouse on South Broadway, Route 9, one-half mile south of the Tappan Zee
Bridge in Tarrytown. Admission and parking are free.

WAR AND THE MIND

An unusual discussion relating to World War II is to take place on Monday at
8:15 P.M. in the Administration Building of New York Hospital's Westchester
Division, at 21 Bloomingdale Road in White Plains.

While the program is open to the public, its sponsors hope to attract as many
mental health professionals as possible, particularly those who served in the
war.

The panelists are Dr. M. Donald Coleman, Dr. Maurice S. Nadelman and Dr. Howard
H. Schlossmann, all veterans who later became psychoanalysts and members of the
Westchester Psychoanalytic Society. The subject is memory of the war -- and how
individual memories may have been altered, repressed or intensified, and with
what subsequent results.

Participants in the Korean War, the Vietnam War and other conflicts have
sometimes been given counseling and a deeper understanding of their psyches than
was available half a century ago. The enormity of World War II, according to the
participating doctors, and its largely untapped psychological residue need to be
captured before those who experienced it are gone.

Some of the specifics to be examined are bonding in military units -- sometimes
so powerful that other units were regarded as enemies -- changes in the function
of egos and responses to extreme danger and fatigue. Admission is free. Call
939-2085 for reservations, which are required, and more information.

THINKING OF ANGELS

Gloria Cigolini's near obsession with angels in her paintings is understandable.
She weighed 3 pounds, 3 ounces at birth and fought illnesses that brought her
close to death in her childhood. Her work, which also speaks to the concerns of
women, may be seen at the Lynn Prince Gallery, 198 Main Street, Poughkeepsie,
through May 13, in an exhibition titled "Magic, Mystery and Madness."

The three M's express what the viewer will encounter in her pictures, executed
in a style that is arresting and disturbing.

Now in her early 40's, she has amassed an impressive catalogue of shows, awards
and competitions in France and the United States. Her paintings have been seen
at the Musee de Gemmail in Tours, France, the Salmagundi Club in Manhattan and
the Indianapolis Museum of Art and on the walls of Paul McCartney's London home
and Pepsico's headquarters in Purchase.

Hours at the gallery are Thursdays through Saturdays from noon to 5 P.M., and
the phone number is 485-2406.

JEKYLL, HYDE AND TEENS

Supplanting the dark abominations of "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde" with a scenario
that youngsters between the third- to ninth-grade level can relate to, David
Crane, Marta Kauffman and the composer Michael Skloff came up with a musical
titled "Jekyll and Hyde."

It will have two performances on Tuesday, at 10 A.M. and noon, at the Palace
Theater, 61 Atlantic Street in Stamford, produced by Theaterworks/USA, the
esteemed children's theater company.

Instead of Dr. Jekyll, the main character is a teen-ager, Henry Meckler, premier
nerd of his school and the resident genius in chemistry. Desperately needing
something to boost his social standing, he invents a substance that he calls
More, which he imbibes, transforming himself into the personification of cool --
charming with women, aggressive with bullies, and so on.

The plot thickens when Henry needs more and more More to maintain his new
personna, until it takes over his life and sends him into an academic and
personal tailspin. Any resemblance to drug addiction is purely intentional but
handled so entertainingly that children and their parents have a good time.
Tickets are $5. Call (203) 325-4466 for reservations or more information.

READING BY A WRITER

Grace Paley, named the first New York State Author in 1986, winner of the 1986
Edith Wharton Citation of Merit, the 1993 winner of the Rea Short Story Award
and a teacher at Sarah Lawrence College since 1966, will read from her
"Collected Stories," published by Farrar, Strauss & Giroux last year, on
Wednesday at 8 P.M. in the Reisinger Auditorium on the Sarah Lawrence campus at
1 Mead Way in Yonkers.

Describing herself as a "somewhat combative pacifist and cooperative anarchist,"
Ms. Paley was a member of the War Resisters League during the Vietnam War and
traveled to Hanoi in 1978.

Admission to the reading is free. For more information, call 395-2220.

AN EPIC REWORKED

Mallika Sarabhai, an Indian artist and women's activist, has written a
multimedia theater piece called "Sita's Daughters" in which she has revised the
ending of the Hindu epic "Ramayana." It will be performed on Monday at 8 P.M. in
Olin Auditorium at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson. Tickets at $10 will be
available at the door.

The work was created, the playwright said, "from a desire to talk to the
multitude of poor women who are not in a position to speak for themselves and to
break the complacency of the right wing."

In "Ramayana," Sita is rescued from kidnappers by her husband, Rama, then made
to walk through fire to prove her fidelity and chastity. She does so, but Rama
is not convinced and banishes her. In Ms. Sarabhai's version, Sita still comes
through the fire but is unwilling to put up with Rama's jealousy, so she leaves
him.

This Sita is a voice against "the 6,000-year history of punishment, rape and
murder of Indian women who attempted to exercise their intellects, strength and
desire for liberation," Ms. Sarabhai said.

A dancer, choreographer and screen actress, she has performed in Europe, Asia,
Britain and the United States. For more information, call 758-6822.

PAINTERS OUTSIDE

Paintings that have hardly had time to dry will be auctioned at the Garrison Art
Center next Saturday after a day of plein-air painting by 80 artists. The event
begins early in the morning, when the artists check in for coffee, pick up their
lunches and set out to their favorite Hudson River Valley sites to paint.

They must return to the center by 3 P.M. with their wet paintings ready to hang
for a preview and a wine and cheese reception from 4 to 4:45 P.M. The auction
will begin at 4:45 P.M. with Neil Vaughn of the Cold Spring Galleries in Beacon
at the microphone. Admission is free, and half the purchase price of any artwork
is tax deductible.

The nonprofit art center is at Garrison Landing, just west of the junction of
Routes 9D and 403. For more information, call 424-3960.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Chuck Close," photograph in a Pelham Art Center show. (Myles
Aronowitz)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              173 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS: VOWS;
Robert O. Butler, Elizabeth Dewberry

BYLINE: By LOIS SMITH BRADY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 65; Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 662 words


THE novelists Robert Olen Butler, 50, and Elizabeth Dewberry, 32, knew they were
meant for each other when they could sit in a room together and not only write
but also write well.

Neither had previously been able to reach what Mr. Butler calls "that deep-down
deepest place, the artistic unconsciousness" in the presence of another person.
It is one thing to meet the approval of someone's family; it is another to meet
the approval of someone's muse.

The two, both of whom had been married before, originally met at a booksellers
convention in Atlanta two years ago and ran into each other again several months
later in Tennessee at the Sewanee Writers Conference, where each led a creative
writing workshop. Writers conferences are known for their plentiful Bloody
Marys, late-night skinny-dipping expeditions, love affairs and gossip about love
affairs. Theirs was closely watched.

"People were very interested in us," said Mr. Butler, who won a Pulitzer Prize
in 1993 for his collection of stories, "A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain."
"I brought Betsy home one evening and somebody had inconspicuously propped a
pencil up against the door so she couldn't go in without knocking the pencil
out. Somebody was very curious to see if she'd been out all night."

In a romance between writers, reading each other's work is always a risk. It can
ruin everything, if the writing is horrible, or feel like the ultimate
heart-to-heart talk, which is how it was for Mr. Butler and Ms. Dewberry. "On
some level, we fell in love reading each other's books," Mr. Butler said.

Ms. Dewberry added: "We knew we were deeply connected in our souls, but then the
question was, 'Can we live together in the quotidian?' It turned out we could.
We both eat our meals in about 10 minutes. We recently renovated the house and
never had one argument."

Superficially, their works do not seem alike. She is currently working on
"Baggage," a play set at La Guardia Airport. It features several characters,
including a snake-handling preacher and a suicidal divorcee, who come together
because they have lost their luggage.

Mr. Butler's stories are often based on his experiences as a soldier in Vietnam.
They are not war stories, exactly, but tales about the quality of light, smells
of fish sauce and characters living in the back alleys of Saigon and expatriate
Vietnamese neighborhoods in the United States.

But their underlying themes are similar. "All of our books have dealt with a
search for wholeness and connectedness," Ms. Dewberry said. "So it will be very
interesting to see how our writing changes now that we've found it after a
lifelong search."

Attending their wedding was like attending a short reading on the subject of
love. They were married on April 23, Shakespeare's supposed birthday, on the
terrace at Tavern on the Green. Sixty guests, including the writers Pat Conroy,
Scott Spencer, John Calvin Batchelor, Hilma Wolitzer and Ann Beattie, stood
around them, looking like a crowd gathered around a chess game in the park.

The couple, who now live in Lake Charles, La., had spent the day before seated
at a table in a bed-and-breakfast on the Upper West Side writing their vows
together in pretty, small books with blank pages.

They carried the books to the wedding and read their vows aloud. Each described
the exact light, mood and smells in a place -- he chose Saigon; she wrote about
a park in Louisiana -- where they had spent time together and felt particularly
madly in love.

They also discussed how they would affect each other's work. She wrote that
their relationship "makes it possible to visit the frightening places our
writing requires."

And they made promises. "I wish to marry you and speak and write my love for you
forever," he said. After the readings were over, the Rev. Dr. Bonnie Rosborough,
a minister of the United Church of Christ who performed the ceremony, exclaimed,
"In the place where I work, I'd say, 'Amen!' "

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert O. Butler, Elizabeth Dewberry; Tavern on the Green,
April 23. (Photographs by Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              174 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Vietnam Speaks English With an Eager Accent

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words


QUOC KHOI carries the history of Vietnam on the tip of his tongue. As foreign
powers have come and gone, Mr. Khoi, who is now in his 50's, has learned French,
then Japanese, then English, then Russian. Vietnam is on its own now, and Mr.
Khoi is again riding the linguistic wave of history: He is making his living
teaching English.

"Now I forget my Russian and my Japanese," he said recently, speaking his
English words carefully to avoid mistakes. "Even French I almost forget. But
English everybody in Vietnam must know because English is the language of
commerce."

In the dimly lit classroom of Mr. Khoi's private language school in the center
of Ho Chi Minh City, once called Saigon, students ranging in age from 12 to 50
gathered for an evening class, like many thousands of others across the nation.
Asked why they were here, their answers were a jumble of eager but barely
intelligible English. But the words "international language" came through
clearly.

Twenty years after the end of the war and the disappearance of Americans from
Vietnam, this Communist country is in the throes of an English-language boom
that has little to do with the past and everything to do with the nation's rush
to join the international marketplace. The war seems all but forgotten as
ordinary Vietnamese welcome American visitors not as former soldiers but as
future investors.

The titles of the English-language tapes for sale in the Xuan Thu bookstore tell
the story: "International Business English," "English for Business," "We're in
Business," "Good for Business." And for those who wish to refine their accents,
there is "Sheep or Ship."

The study of English seems to carry little cultural or historical baggage for
the Vietnamese. There is neither resentment against American culture nor a deep
fascination with it. Mary Kay Crouch, a professor of English at California State
University at Fullerton who has helped set up English courses in Vietnam, said,
"One of our proposals was to do some teaching of American culture, and I can
tell you, people were not interested. They want to know how much money do I make
and do I have a car and how do I live, and that's about it."




The Common Tongue

Most American businessmen arrived in Vietnam only after the lifting of
Washington's trade embargo a little more than a year ago, but their language
preceded them. English was already established as the common tongue among the
Japanese, Koreans, Taiwanese, Southeast Asians and Europeans who dominate the
foreign presence and the market. Now that more Americans are arriving and the
Government is encouraging foreign trade, the language is more prized than ever.

"English has become the universal language in Vietnam, just as the dollar is the
currency of choice," said Jeffrey Brody, a journalism professor at Fullerton who
has spent time in Vietnam.

The Vietnamese, in their eagerness to learn English, often approach foreigners
to practice it. They listen to lessons on radio and television, both of which
are state-controlled, and to tapes in their cars. In the evenings, farmers keep
their families' suppers warm while their children attend English classes.

Colleges are busy turning out English speakers as fast as they can. The Teachers
Training College of Ho Chi Minh City offers night classes to 30,000 students,
said Diane Fox, an English teacher at Portland State University who has also
taught English in Vietnam. She said some of her former students in Vietnam --
and not even the best of them -- have quickly become wealthy teaching English.

In the midst of this bustle, there are few lonelier places in Ho Chi Minh City
than the local Russian Cultural Center. At midday, the secretary, Nguyen Thi
Nhi, sits alone in her office, and when a rare visitor knocks, she must
telephone the director, Victor Stepanov, at his home. He is the only remaining
member of a staff of 12 Russians that once included science and technology
specialists, several language teachers and a specialist in propaganda. "We call
it the lowering of interest in the Russian language," Mr. Stepanov said. "Now,
no question about it, there is an overwhelming rush to speak English. It seems
everybody speaks English now, if only a few phrases."




The Dead Language

Not long ago, everybody was learning Russian. For the 15 years that Moscow was
Hanoi's chief patron, more than 100,000 Vietnamese workers and 3,000 students
were in the Soviet Union at any one time. Then the Soviet Union collapsed,
Vietnam turned outward and Washington lifted its trade embargo. Russian quickly
became a dead language for most Vietnamese, and a generation of Russian-language
teachers had no one left to teach.

Meanwhile, many qualified English teachers went into business with high-paying
foreign companies. So the Russian teachers retrained, by the hundreds, to teach
English. "My cousin was a Russian teacher," said T. T. Nhu, a
Vietnamese-American who is a columnist for The San Jose Mercury News. "Now they
are all madly trying to learn English."

As a result, in a country where an older generation still speaks English with a
French accent, a new generation of English speakers with a Russian accent is
emerging. In search of what they hope will be a more authentic accent, Ms. Nhu
said, some students are now traveling to Australia.

In a land where youngsters once learned to shout "Hey, G.I.!" before they
learned to read and write, children are again learning how to greet foreigners,
even in places where they are rarely seen.

One recent sunny morning in the mountain city of Da Lat, a 10-year-old girl
holding a small boy on her hip stared curiously at an American as he sipped tea
at an outdoor table.

"Do you want to study English in school?" the American asked her, speaking in
Vietnamese.

"No," the girl said, walking away. "I don't want to study at all."

But then she stopped and looked back. "Thank you!" she said in English. "See you
again!"

And the small boy on her hip waved and said, "See you again!"

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: When it comes to picking the language of commerce, the choice is
clear. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              175 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TERROR IN OKLAHOMA: VIOLENCE;
Anger of the 60's Takes Root in the Violent Right

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1580 words


On the surface, few eras would seem to have less in common than the tie-dyed
turmoil of the 1960's and the edgy, armed-to-the-teeth anger of the 1990's.

But many historians who track the nation's mood swings say they detect an odd
and striking inversion in which the anger, discontent and distrust of authority
that erupted on the left in the 60's have become the signatures of the right 30
years later.

The notion is not that the rumblings of the old left have been transformed into
today's right-wing agenda or that the sporadic and largely inept violence of the
60's is mirrored in the horror of Oklahoma City. Instead, there is a sense that
Vietnam War-era turmoil tore a hole in the post-World War II social fabric, and
that although it was the left that opened the rift, it is the right that has
driven a truck through it.

Indeed, many experts say that to understand today's right-wing anger it is
necessary first to make sense of the tumult three decades ago.

"What happened in the 1960's was that the Government was successfully
'delegitimated,' " said Gerald Marwell, a sociologist at the University of
Wisconsin who studies American political movements. "We had a period from World
War II through the 1950's where the Government was seen as having rescued the
nation from the Depression and successfully prosecuted the war, and then we were
told in the 1960's that the emperor has no clothes and people shouldn't accept
what they're told."

Historians acknowledge the limitations of comparing different eras.  Many say
any understanding of the passions and paranoias of the 90's must begin with the
recognition that the nation's history is rife with bitter rifts and
conspiratorial vapors.Indeed many historians find the relative, though hardly
universal, degree of national consensus that marked the 1940's and 1950's to be
the exception in American life rather than the norm.

"This is the most anti-state country in the Western world, probably on earth,"
said Michael Kazin, a historian at the American University in Washington and the
author of "The Populist Persuasion: An American History" (Basic Books, 1994).
"Throughout American history groups on the right and the left have seen the
Federal Government as an alien force inimical to their interests, so you see
this sort of thing over and over again."

What happened in the 60's, he wrote, is that the left "only discredited the old
order without laying the political foundation for a new one."

Many scholars of American history have long acknowledged what the historian
Richard Hofstadter called "the paranoid style in American politics," a tendency
to view the world in terms of dense conspiracies that in various eras have
centered on groups as diverse as Masons, Catholics, Jews, international bankers,
Mormons, foreign gold traders, and the Bavarian Illuminati.

To cite a more recent example, Senator Joseph McCarthy, during his campaign
against Communist infiltration in 1951, described "a great conspiracy, a
conspiracy on a scale so immense as to dwarf any previous such venture in the
history of man," to undermine the United States Government from within.

The Soviet threat is gone, but conspiracy theories spring up with numbing
frequency, exemplified most recently by the claim that the attack on the Federal
Building in Oklahoma City was a Government plot to discredit the paramilitary
groups that call themselves militias.

Even the details of the supposed conspiracies faxed and E-mailed among
right-wing groups from Montana to Michigan are eerily similar to those alleged
by the John Birch Society and other right-wing groups of the late 50's and early
60's.

Today there are claims that United Nations troops have taken over Yellowstone
National Park and that sinister military vehicles identified with an inverted V
are prowling rural Michigan. Three decades ago allegations included reports that
35,000 Chinese Communist troops were poised on the Mexico border ready to invade
California, that the Army had been turned over to a Russian colonel in the
United Nations and that an Army guerrilla warfare exercise in Georgia called
Water Moccasin III was actually a United Nations operation prepared to take over
the United States.

Still, the suspicions of today are hardly limited to the right.

Not far from Professor Marwell's office, Karlton Armstrong runs an outdoor juice
stand on the University of Wisconsin Library Mall. Twenty-five years ago, Mr.
Armstrong, then an antiwar activist, was one of the campus radicals who planted
a fertilizer and fuel oil bomb at Sterling Hall, home of the university's
Physics Department and of the oil bomb's target, the Army Math Research Center.
The explosion killed a graduate student, in one of the most infamous episodes of
the era.

Mr. Armstrong, who served 7 years of his 14-year sentence for murder and arson
in the bombing, is now 48 and has no sympathy for today's far-right fringe
groups. He now views the Sterling Hall bombing as a betrayal of his own beliefs,
even though the bomb was detonated with the intention that the building would be
unoccupied.

But when asked about the sense of frustration and alienation abroad in the land,
he said: "These people are rapidly becoming dispossessed, like they are losing
what little power they had. I totally empathize with that sense of alienation."

And just as it was alienated hippies who preceded ring-wing groups in retreating
to the woods to create communes free from the corrupting influences of the
Government and urban life, the sensibilities of the 60's have left many with the
same kind of distrust of Government now so endemic on the right.

"I don't consider myself a paranoid by any means, but I've been given plenty of
reasons to fear my Government," said Susan Spangenberg of Madison, who is active
in the Wisconsin Alliance for the Medicalization of Cannabis, which seeks to
make marijuana more readily available for medical uses. "The militias have the
same civil rights as I do, as we all do, and if the Government can intrude on
civil rights on the right, it could just as easily do it for someone who gets
labeled a left-wing liberal."

To many on the left, there is something utterly perverse in any effort to link
their philosophy with the armed extremist right of the 1990's. Many say the
incessant anti-Government rhetoric of the right says more about the present than
the turmoil of the 60's.

"Don't insult me," said Paul Soglin, the former anti-war activist who is now
Mayor of Madison. "That's the thinking of very stupid people who need an
elementary education in civics and political science."

He and others said the left of the 1960's was rooted in nonviolence and sought
to prod the Government toward what it saw as appropriate action in ending the
war in Vietnam and enforcing civil rights laws, while the extremist right is
steeped in weapons and violence and opposed to almost all Government activism.
Those on the right say a more telling difference is that the 1960's were also
steeped in a contempt for traditional values.

But many experts see important points of convergence. Professor Marwell of
Wisconsin and Professor Kazin of the American University see a libertarian
strain from the 1960's that, intentionally or not, became more of a legacy than
leftist politics. To the 60's left it might have meant the right to smoke pot,
while to the 90's right it might mean the right to own guns, but the instinct is
similar.

"My favorite button from the anti-draft S.D.S. was, 'Not With My Life You
Don't,' " Mr. Kazin, a former anti-war activist himself, said, referring to the
radical group Students for a Democratic Society. "It could be the slogan of the
right wing today, a don't-tread-on-me, get-off-my-back kind of statement."

Others say that rather than the politics of the student movement of the 1960's
and early 70's, it was the various upheavals and shocks of the era -- from the
Kennedy assassination to the Vietnam War to Watergate to unresolved issues of
racial and sexual equality -- that produced fault lines in American life that
have never been bridged.

"There's a culture war, particularly the part of it that has to do with gender,
that's still playing out today, whether it's overtly talked about or not," said
Emily Rosenberg, a history professor at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minn.

Professors Kazin and Rosenberg both said a more compelling historical parallel
than the 1960's may be the 1890's, when structural changes in the economy, anger
at immigrants and the widespread sense that communities and individuals were
losing economic control produced an angry populist movement and widespread
social turmoil. Ms. Rosenberg noted that the last decade of a century has almost
invariably produced a sense of momentous change, whether manifested as dread or
as anticipation. She said she suspected the discord of the 90's could have
further to run.

But the ripples of the 1890's are merely historical. The reverberations of the
1960's are still very real. Professor Marwell said one to watch would be whether
the violence of Oklahoma City would discredit the right in the 1990's in the way
that the Sterling Hall bombing short-circuited the left in the 1960's. He said
he thought it would.

"The bombing here in Madison almost ended the anti-war movement all by itself,"
he said. "The whole right may not be at fault for Oklahoma City, but I think
they're underestimating the price they're going to pay."

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              176 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Athletes and Stigmas

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 111 words


To the Sports Editor:

In "Two Years and Waiting for a Sign" (The Times, April 30), I am surprised by
the choice of Robin Finn's language when she says Monica Seles "still carries
the political stigma of being born in Serbia."

I am not from the former Yugoslavia, but besides Serbs, Bosnian Serbs and
Croatian Serbs, do the following still carry political stigmas: Steffi Graf of
Germany (World War II), Kimiko Date (World War II), Andre Agassi (Vietnam War)?
The list can go on and on. The action of political leaders, regardless of
country, does not mean the entire population is in accordance and should be
stigmatized.

ROBERT E. BERK
New York

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              177 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Takes Gulf Syndrome Seriously

SECTION: Section A;   Page 18;   Column 5;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 317 words


To the Editor:

Re "C.I.A. Nominee Misled on Gulf Syndrome" (letter, May 5): Since veterans of
Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm first began reporting illnesses, the
Department of Defense has made every effort to meet three goals.

First, we have sought to provide all these veterans caring and compassionate
medical care. Together with the Department of Veterans Affairs, we are and have
been providing such care to every affected veteran who steps forward.

Second, we have made every effort to determine the cause or causes of these
illnesses, employing military medical resources as well as expert independent
review panels. To date, we have been unable to identify unambiguously what made
these veterans sick.

In particular, we cannot corroborate reports of chemical weapons use during
Desert Storm. Nonetheless, we continue to search for explanations, and we retain
an open mind.

Third, we have attempted to conduct our response to this illness openly and
honestly. We well understood the mistakes this department committed by failing
early on to acknowledge the serious medical consequences of military use of
Agent Orange in Vietnam.

In all my comments I have tried to convey the uncertainty the department still
has about the facts of this illness, hence my caveat that we believe we can rule
out "widespread" use of chemical weapons, but that it would be unscientific to
state categorically that we are certain there was no use or presence of any
chemical or biological agent during the Persian Gulf War.

I am astounded that former Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr. and his former staff
assistant would accuse me or anyone else at the Defense Department of a
cover-up. Our veterans and public discourse would be better served by continued
examination of the evidence rather than groundless charges.

JOHN M. DEUTCH
Deputy Secretary of Defense
Washington, May 5, 1995

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              178 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Rethinking Welfare: Interstate Migration -- A special report.;
Larger Benefits Lure Chicagoans to Wisconsin

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON

SECTION: Section A;   Page 11;   Column 3;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1795 words

DATELINE: MADISON, Wis.


In its heyday of counterculture chic a generation ago, the streets of this
Wisconsin capital pulsed with protesters demanding a fair share for America's
poor people and its racial minorities.

Yet the profile of the city itself was not exactly proletarian: overwhelmingly
white, highly educated and relatively affluent. Madisonians might have been
champions of the downtrodden, but they were rarely their neighbors.

In recent years, however, issues of race and poverty have become a bit less
abstract here, as a small but growing number of poor Chicagoans are fleeing
gang-torn neighborhoods and moving the 150 miles to Madison for better schools,
safer streets and, some of the newcomers acknowledge, more generous welfare
benefits.

"It's not the only reason I came," said Austina Moore, 26, who moved here from
Chicago last fall with her four young children, and later persuaded her mother,
Hester Moore, who is also on welfare, to follow them. "But it sure helps to get
$200 more a month."

She now receives $708 a month, and the cost of living is generally lower in
Madison than Chicago.

The influx of poor people from Chicago is testing this city's historical
liberalism. About one-quarter of the 3,300 Madison families receiving welfare
are former Illinois residents.

Even Mayor Paul Soglin, who earned his liberal stripes in the anti-establishment
politics of the 1960's as a leader of Vietnam War protests, now talks of "finite
limits of resources" for the poor. He warns against "the duplication of old
ghetto neighborhoods" with the same problems that families came to Madison to
escape.

"We're like a lifeboat that holds 12 people comfortably," Mr. Soglin said.
"We've got about 16 in it now, and there's a dozen more waiting in the water.
Since we're already in danger of going under, what can our community be expected
to do?"

Despite benefit levels that have been frozen for nearly a decade and eligibility
rules that have been tightened under Gov. Tommy G. Thompson, a Republican,
assistance checks for the poor in Wisconsin are still about 40 percent higher
than in Illinois. A family of four living in poverty in Wisconsin is entitled to
$617 a month while the same family would receive $414 in Illinois.

Some experts on poverty say migration of welfare recipients would increase
sharply under the Republican plan in Congress to replace the main Federal
program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, with a system controlled by
the states.

Under the current A.F.D.C. program, the Federal Government pays about half the
benefits, at levels set by the states. Already the payments vary; for example,
in Mississippi the amount is $120 while New York pays $703.

In New York City, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani drew criticism last month when, in
defending welfare cuts, he suggested that lower payments might persuade some
welfare recipients to leave the city.

Under a block-grant system approved by the House of Representatives, the
Government would give the states lump sums for welfare, to be spent as they saw
fit. Many experts say this system could widen the differences in benefits
because states would have more freedom to set eligibility criteria and benefit
levels.

"States that are concerned about welfare migration now, just wait," said Thomas
Corbett, associate director of the Institute for Research on Poverty at the
University of Wisconsin at Madison. "They'll really be concerned under the
block-grant system."

Governors are already trying to throw up fences to reduce their states' appeal
to welfare migrants. In Connecticut, for example, Gov. John G. Rowland, a
Republican, has proposed slashing benefits and adopting the toughest eligibility
requirements in the country to discourage poor people from moving there.

Newcomers to four Wisconsin counties, not including Madison's, are only eligible
for aid at the level paid by their former state for six months. After that, they
receive the same rate as other Wisconsin residents.

A vibrant economy in Wisconsin surely accounts for much of the migration among
poor people, most of them looking for jobs. The state's unemployment rate has
dipped below 4 percent while that in Illinois is 4.4 percent.

In Madison, it is less than 2 percent, the lowest of any large city in the
United States. That has put pressure on the city's employers to raise wages.
Even fast-food restaurants are advertising jobs at $6 and $7 an hour, plus
benefits.

But Mr. Thompson insists that many poor people are coming to the state
principally for welfare. "If you don't think so, just look at the statistics,"
he said.

Since Mr. Thompson took office in January 1987 and began efforts to trim the
welfare rolls, the number of recipients has dropped nearly 25 percent, to about
75,000. In one program, now being tested in two counties, welfare benefits end
after two years.

Mark Rom, the author of "Welfare Magnets: A New Case for a National Welfare
Standard" (Brookings Institution, 1990), said most studies have found that such
migration "is real, but is quite modest." Decisions to move are "as complicated
for poor people as they are for rich people," he said, and rarely boil down to a
single factor.

"But while there is some disagreement among social scientists about whether this
kind of migration exists," Mr. Rom said, "there is no doubt among state
legislators that it is real. Under the block-grant program, states will trim
benefits to make sure they're not any more generous than their neighbors,
worried that they'll be seen as welfare magnets."

One terminus for newcomers here, the Broadway-Simpson neighborhood, is one of
the city's poorest, but its rows of tidy brick apartment buildings would never
be mistaken for a rough section in Chicago. Nonetheless, some gang members and
drug dealers have settled among the families that came here to flee such
problems.

"This was our neighborhood before the gangs and drugs took it over," declared
the hand-printed sign in a neighborhood center here, written by 9-year-old
Keisha Robinson. "And we want it back." Next to the message, someone has written
in large letters: "Now!"

While the migration of poor Chicagoans has brought some problems, it has also
brought redemption for many families that had once virtually given up on life.

Cindy Wells, 37, recalled hearing gunshots every day in her South Side
neighborhood in Chicago, where her three young children were not allowed to play
outside, and where she said she watched a police officer take a bribe from a
drug dealer in broad daylight.

Ms. Wells, who had been on welfare when she arrived in Madison eight years ago,
said a network of charitable organizations and social service agencies helped
her get squared away. She was given temporary housing in the Y.W.C.A.,
furniture, clothes, food and transportation vouchers for the children to get to
school.

"People in Madison smiled at me, shook my hand, answered my questions," she
said. "For once, I could walk the streets without wondering, 'Who is going to
jump me? Who is going to beat me up?' "

Within a couple of months, she got a job working with poor children. And today,
her family is thriving. Her eldest son, Irwin, 16, an honor student at James
Madison High School, was recently awarded a college academic scholarship.

"I blossomed here," said Ms. Wells, an ebullient woman in dreadlocks and a
"Beverly Hills 90210" sweatshirt. "I became a whole person."

But Ms. Wells said she planned to move out of her apartment complex and into a
nearby town house because drug dealers in her building had created an unsavory
atmosphere. She said her children had complained of headaches from the stench of
marijuana and crack.

She said that when she told a man smoking crack in the hallway to have the
decency to go inside his own apartment, "he spit in my face."

Groups of former Chicagoans, intent on preserving the good life in Madison, have
established support groups like the Moms of Simpson Street. The Simpson Street
group holds festive dinners to honor men in the community, like police officers,
teachers and ordinary fathers, who are good role models.

One of the best things about life in a place like Madison, many of the newcomers
say, is that ill-mannered behavior is not tolerated. "It's strict up here," said
Ruthie Debrow, a former Chicagoan who moved here on welfare and now works for a
social service agency, "and the young people learn that in a hurry." She added,
"If a kid gets into trouble, you can be sure the social workers are going to be
coming to the home, asking, 'Now what's going on here?' "

The police say keeping a lid on trouble is easier in a smaller city like
Madison, with a population of about 190,000, which is not overwhelmed by crime.
Selling drugs on street corners might be considered old hat in Chicago, officers
say, but it is not tolerated in Madison.

Dorothy Doheny, a police officer here, said one young drug dealer had asked
incredulously, "For just one rock of cocaine, you're going to throw me in jail?"
The officer replied, "Yep."

Ms. Wells, among other newcomers, said she would never consider returning to
live in her old home town: "I only go back to Chicago for funerals."

RETHINKING WELFARE
Block Grants

THE GOAL -- Block Grants, or lump sum Federal payments made directly to the
states, would gove more states control over Federal aid to low-income people
without the bureaucratic strings attached in Washington. House Republicans say a
block-grant system would control costs and rein in the growth of entitlements.

THE PROPOSALS

HOUSE PLAN
Under a welfare bill passed by the House, Federal entitlement program including
family assistance and school lunch subsidies would by replaced by block grants
that states could use as they wished to aid the poor. The money would be
earmarked for specific purposes, but states would be able to set benefits and
eligibility criteria.

GOVERNORS PLAN
Republican governors say the House bill would still impose too many restrictions
on them. It would, for example, set a five year limit on Federal welfare
payments to a family and would bar the use of Federal money to provide cash
assistance to unmarried teen-age mothers. The governors have devised an
alternative proposal that would give them more say over eligibility rules. They
would also replace the food stamp program, which the House bill would keep at
the Federal level, with block grants.

EFFECT ON STATES -- Some governors fear that under the House proposal many poor
people would be out of luck if demand for services outran a state's grant or if
state officials were unable to administer such complicated programs. Some
critics also fear that the money would not be evenly distributed among the
states.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A growing number of poor Chicagoans are fleeing that city and
moving to Madison, Wis., for better schools, safer streets and more generous
welfare benefits. Cindy Wells, who was on welfare when she arrived in Madison
eight years ago, has prospered there. "I became a whole person," she said.
(Morry Gash for The New York Times)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              179 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Remembering Vietnam

SECTION: Section B;   Page 5;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Were you in Pleiku?" said one. "I was in Bien Hoa." The far-off
place names, once familiar, were murmured again as thousands solemnly paid
tribute yesterday to 1,547 war dead at the dedication of the New Jersey Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Holmdel. Maureen Di Benedetto of Hillside put flowers and a
photo of her brother, Francis B. Madden Jr., under the black granite slab
engraved with his name, above. Al Chiola of Highland Park, right, looked over
the names of others in whose memory donations were given for the walkway at the
memorial. Below, Sean Veen touched the name of his mother's uncle, Robert E.
Viggiano. (Photographs by Dith Pran/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              180 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B;   Page 8;   Column 5;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


HARRIET MAYOR FULBRIGHT , the widow of Senator J. William Fulbright, who died in
February, wants people to know this about her husband: He was a very witty man.

"I have done a tremendous amount of speaking about his legacy and his ideas
since he passed away," she said. "Obviously, the reason we celebrate him is his
ideas. Even in all the memorial services, it was his vision that was stressed,
not the human being."

Mrs. Fulbright, who married the former Senator five years ago and who is
president of the Center for Arts in the Basic Curriculum, intends to remedy that
tonight when she speaks at the United Nations headquarters, where Metro
International is holding its 1995 Fulbright Awards dinner. The organization
provides cultural programs for Fulbright scholars and other international
students in the New York area.

"Most people think of him as a very serious human being because his ideas were
so serious, especially during the Vietnam War when he was so besieged," Mrs.
Fulbright said. "But he had the most wonderful sense of humor, and that is what
I want to bring out."
   NADINE BROZAN

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              181 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Dr. Kevorkian Assists at His 22d Suicide

BYLINE: By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, May 8


Dr. Jack Kevorkian stood by today as a terminally ill man killed himself,
exactly two weeks after the Supreme Court refused to consider the doctor's
appeal of a Michigan court's ruling that assisted suicide is a crime. It was the
22d time Dr. Kevorkian has assisted in a suicide.

Early this morning, the ill man, the Rev. John E. Evans, a Unitarian minister
with a terminal lung disease, committed suicide in his home in Royal Oak, a
northern suburb of Detroit, said Dr. Kevorkian's lawyer, Geoffrey Fieger. Mr.
Fieger declined to say how Mr. Evans killed himself.

The police and the Oakland County prosecutor's office were investigating the
death, which they initially attributed to natural causes. Mr. Evans had
pulmonary fibrosis.

The Royal Oak police said they were called to Mr. Evans's home just after 7 A.M.
by his wife, who told them her husband, who was 78, had passed away.

The police officers said they heard that the death was an assisted suicide after
Mr. Fieger called a news conference at 11:30 A.M.

In a statement released by Mr. Fieger, Mr. Evans's widow, Jan Evans-Tiller,
said: "My husband was a courageous man who had the courage to do what is right.
Dr. Kevorkian is such a person also." Mrs. Evans-Tiller was identified as the
"minister of religious education" at a Unitarian church in Detroit.

Dr. Kevorkian's participation in the suicide was a clear rejection of recent
court rulings and a virtual challenge to his chief legal nemesis, the Oakland
County prosecutor, Richard Thompson, whose jurisdiction includes Royal Oak. Mr.
Thompson did not respond to a message left at his office today.

The prosecutor has tried to charge Dr. Kevorkian with murder three times and
with violating the state's law against assisted suicide several times since the
doctor began helping terminally ill people take their lives in 1990.

Dr. Kevorkian now faces trial in at least four of those cases, including two in
which he could be prosecuted for murder if the state can prove that the deaths
were the "direct and natural result" of his actions.

Mr. Fieger said he and Dr. Kevorkian, a retired pathologist, did not believe
there was a Michigan law against assisted suicide. "I don't believe compassion
can be a crime," he said.

But the Michigan courts have ruled that assisted suicide is a felony. In
December, the seven-member Michigan Supreme Court found that "the United States
Constitution does not prohibit a state from imposing criminal penalties on one
who assists another in committing suicide."

The court ruled that even without a law explicitly banning assisted suicide, the
act could be prosecuted as a common-law felony, carrying a five-year prison
term.

Dr. Kevorkian appealed the Michigan high court's ruling to the United States
Supreme Court. "It is not the ending of life, but rather the ending of
suffering, which is the genuine issue," he wrote in his appeal.

On April 24, the Supreme Court turned down his challenge without commenting on
it. The Justices' refusal to hear his appeal did not set a precedent and did not
amount to a decision on the merits.

Almost exactly a year ago, a Wayne County jury acquitted Dr. Kevorkian of
violating a state law prohibiting assisted suicide, in the only case which has
been brought before a jury. The statute expired last year.

Dr. Kevorkian began assisting suicides in June 1990, and he last participated in
an attempted suicide on Nov. 26, 1994.

Both Dr. Kevorkian's friends and foes said today that they were not surprised to
hear he had attended at another suicide.

"We should all know that he hasn't changed, and I think he never will," said
Janet Good, president of the Michigan chapter of the Hemlock Society, which
supports doctor-assisted suicide. "Dr. Kevorkian has always said that he will
continue to help suffering people, no matter the consequences."

Dr. Kevorkian's opponents saw more cynical motivations, saying he was timing
suicides to best advance his cause.

"The only reason he hasn't killed somebody since Thanksgiving is that he was
waiting on the Supreme Court," said Lynn Mills, a spokeswoman for Operation
Rescue in Michigan, which opposes assisted suicide. "They looked for an open
window and a slow news day."

Mr. Fieger said Dr. Kevorkian, who turns 67 later this month, could not be
reached for comment.

In a letter addressed to reporters that was released by Mr. Fieger, Mr. Evans
wrote that he had intended to ask several local Unitarian Universalist churches
to rent him space to commit suicide with the help of doctor. He wrote that he
wanted to spare his wife his death at home, and he wanted "to give churches the
opportunity to act on an important ethical issue that, sooner or later, they
must face.

But, he wrote: "My experience with churches gave me little reason to expect that
one was immediately ready to offer this kind of sanctuary. The question remains.
When such a request is made of you, what will be your answer?"

According to a brief biography released by Mr. Fieger, Mr. Evans was a long-time
socialist who counseled draftees in Oakland during the Vietnam War, organized
woodworkers in Vermont, and worked in the Sojourner Truth Organization in
Chicago. It said he had served as a minister of Unitarian Universalist churches
in five states.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              182 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Evron Kirkpatrick, 83, Director Of Political Science Association

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 23;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 414 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Evron M. Kirkpatrick, a scholar who over nearly three decades built the American
Political Science Association into a major academic organization, died on April
26 at his home in Bethesda, Md. He was 83.

His family said the cause of death was congestive heart failure.

In 1954 he was appointed director of the political science association, a post
he held until he retired in 1981. He was credited by associates with fostering
the organization's growth from about 7,000 to more than 15,000 members. He also
taught several terms at Howard University and at Georgetown University. In 1981
he became a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute.

Associates noted that Mr. Kirkpatrick took pains to keep the association out of
the heated controversies that swept most American universities during the 1960's
and 1970's because of the Vietnam War.

Thomas E. Mann, a specialist on government at the Brookings Institution, said of
Mr. Kirkpatrick, "He wanted to treat the arguments and evidence of human
political behavior scientifically."

Among his publications were "Foundation of Political Science" in 1970 and "The
Past and Future of Presidential Debates" in 1979.

Evron Maurice Kirkpatrick was born Aug. 15, 1911, in Raub, Ind. He earned both a
bachelor's and a master's degree in political science at the University of
Illinois, and a doctorate in political science at Yale University in 1939. He
was an early associate of Hubert H. Humphrey, later the Senator and Vice
President, whom he assisted in creating Minnesota's Democratic Farmer Labor
Party in the 1930's. He taught at the University of Minnesota, where Mr.
Humphrey was his student, in the late 1930's and early 1940's.

During World War II he served as assistant director for research and analysis of
the Office of Strategic Services, the Government's wartime intelligence agency.
From there he went to the State Department, where he worked in an identical
capacity for eight years.

His wife of 40 years, Jeane Jordan Kirkpatrick, was the United States Ambassador
to the United Nations during the Reagan Administration. His admiring comment on
his spouse's role was: "I get to meet the most fascinating people, people I'd
never meet on my own."

In addition to Mrs. Kirkpatrick, he is survived by three sons, John E. of Miami;
Stuart A. of Ann Arbor, Mich., and Douglas J. of Bethesda; two daughters, Mary
E. Evans of Austin, Tex., and Anna of Aix-en-Provence, France, and six
grandchildren.

NAME: Evron M. Kirkpatrick

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Evron M. Kirkpatrick (Maggie Steber, 1982)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              183 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

V-E DAY PLUS 50: WASHINGTON;
Clinton Pays Homage to an 'Extraordinary Generation'

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


On an Army parade ground rich with history, President Clinton paid solemn
tribute today to the generation that won World War II and prevailed in the cold
war, thanking veterans for their sacrifice but warning that the nation still
faced "forces of darkness" abroad and at home.

"Because of all you did, we live in a moment of hope, in a nation at peace," Mr.
Clinton told veterans in a ceremony at Fort Myer, Va.

"For the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age, no Russian missiles are
pointed at our children."

But Mr. Clinton, the first American President born after World War II, added:
"There is one thing that even you could not do, that no generation can ever do.
You could not banish the forces of darkness from the future. We confront them
now in different forms all around the world, and painfully, here at home. But
you taught us the most important lesson: that we can prevail over the forces of
darkness, that we must prevail."

As if to underscore his warning, the President's last official act before
leaving for Moscow for V-E Day commemorations there on Tuesday was to sign an
executive order formalizing the trade embargo against Iran that he announced
last week in an effort to isolate Teheran further as a sponsor of terrorism.

[President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, arrived in Moscow, where they were
greeted by the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev.]

One of Mr. Clinton's main tasks in Moscow will be to press President Boris N.
Yeltsin of Russia not to sell nuclear reactors to Iran, though the
Administration holds little hope of stopping the deal.

The order, which takes effect in 30 days, prohibits export of all United States
goods to Iran. It extends a previous ban on the importation of Iranian goods to
stop American companies from buying Iranian oil for resale on the world market.

But at a wreath-laying at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at Arlington National
Cemetery this morning, and then at the 50th anniversary commemoration, Mr.
Clinton focused mainly on the past.

In brilliant spring sunshine, he reviewed troops, bands and aircraft from all
the armed forces and stood ramrod straight as a 21-gun salute shook the lush
green of Summerall Field at Fort Myer, which adjoins Arlington National
Cemetery.

Surrounded by an ethnic rainbow sampling of veterans who were on active duty on
May 8, 1945, Mr. Clinton recited a brief history of the Allies' final push to
victory, the liberation of concentration camps and the jubilant celebrations
that roared through capitals dark and shuttered for five years.

"The saga of hope emerged from the ashes of a horror that defies comprehension
still: the Nazi death camps and the gas chambers and crematoriums with proof of
man's infinite capacity for evil," Mr. Clinton said. "In the empty eyes of the
skeletal survivors was a question that to this day has never been answered: How
could this happen?"

Like many in his generation, Mr. Clinton sought successfully to avoid military
service in Vietnam, and he spoke admiringly, and a bit wistfully, of the common
purpose that animated the nation half a century ago and that helped create the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the United Nations and the Marshall Plan.

"Today we must draw inspiration from the extraordinary generation we come here
to honor, a generation that won the war and then made sure we would not have to
lose the peace," Mr. Clinton said. "A generation that understood our destiny is
inexorably linked to that of other nations -- a generation that believed that
with our great wealth, great power and great blessings of democratic freedom
come great responsibilities to stand for and work for the common good."


Mr. Clinton recalled how the victory was announced by one of his political
heroes, Harry S. Truman, then in office less than a month and celebrating his
61st birthday on V-E Day. "And in an image that traveled all around the world, a
sailor took a nurse in his arms and kissed her with all the pent-up, youthful
enthusiasm of a people forgetting for an instant the new burdens of adulthood,"
he added.

But Mr. Clinton's speechwriters apparently forgot for an instant the facts of
photographic history: Alfred Eisenstaedt's famous picture was snapped in Times
Square three months later, on V-J Day, a term that has rankled Japanese
sensibilities in this anniversary year but that Mr. Clinton used unhesitatingly
today.

At the ceremony, the President was introduced by Frederick McIntosh of Leesburg,
Va, who as a second lieutenant in the Eighth Air Force was the pilot for 104
combat missions over Europe. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, described how Mr. McIntosh had made it back to base "in
his crippled P-47, its cockpit shattered by twin bursts of flak" and enduring
"pain so bad only morphine could control it."

Mr. McIntosh remembered his joy in watching the Eiffel Tower bathed in
searchlights on V-E Day, "as Paris once again became the City of Light," and
"more and more French people hugged me." And in words as simple and graphic as
they were heartfelt, he said, "Democracy can be an expensive way of life, with
heavy costs, payable only in human life."

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Observing V-E Day in Arlington, Va., President Clinton warned
against today's "forces of darkness." The event also included at 21-gun salute.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              184 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

International Briefs;
Hanoi Short of Cement

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 4;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 110 words


A shortage of cement for Vietnam's booming construction industry has caused
prices to double in two weeks and created a chaotic black market, a state-run
newspaper reported yesterday.

Customers have lined up outside Government shops daily to buy cement at low
official prices and resell it for large profits on the unofficial market, the
newspaper, Vietnam News, reported. It is the first such situation since
Communist Vietnam began to adopt free-market policies in 1986, the report said.

Black marketers have hired thugs to threaten shop employees to ignore official
limits on sales and deliver them large quantities of cement, the newspaper said.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              185 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Mary B. W. Tabor

SECTION: Section C;  Page 20;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words



Untabling a Project

The Austrian novelist Robert Musil, whose training as an engineer and stint in
the army gave him a sharp eye for order, would have chuckled at the mess on
Carol Janeway's dining room table in recent years.

In 1979, Ms. Janeway, a senior editor at Alfred A. Knopf, bought the United
States rights to Mr. Musil's four-volume novel, "The Man Without Qualities,"
part of which had been published in Britain, hoping she would see it published
in five years.

"We thought it would just be a matter of tidying up what had already been
translated and establishing an architecture for the last volume," Ms. Janeway
said.

But after 15 years and thousands of pages of translations, Ms. Janeway was still
sitting at her 14-foot table, struggling to pull together the more than 600
pages of drafts and manuscripts, originally written in German, that make up the
1,774-page work. (Her desk at Knopf was far too small for the project.)

Part of the problem was the British translation. Mr. Musil's elaborate verbal
games and nonlinear plot had obviously bewildered earlier translators.

"The problems inherent in the British version were far too severe for tidying,"
Ms. Janeway said. "Major portions of the text had been left out, radically
rewritten or adjusted. We just decided to start over again and take as long as
it took, which was a long time."

The book, now in a translation by Sophie Wilkins and Burton Pike, was published
last month as two large hardback books, at $60 a set. (Translation costs were
well over $50,000.) But inside is still just a glimpse of the reams of material
Ms. Janeway and several scholars culled to pull together Volume 4.

"I just feel immensely pleased because this is a book I have loved all my adult
life," she said.

Because Mr. Musil, before his death in 1942, had chased Mr. Knopf around Europe
trying to get him to publish the work, "it is also a wonderful act of
restitution," she added.

Ms. Janeway's dining table is now clear of Musil papers and set with plates and
napkins and the like. And yes, she said with a laugh, "I've had dinner there."

Dos for the Price of Uno

American publishers have long been aware that there is money to be made selling
books to the growing Hispanic population in this country. And now several houses
have acted on that notion, starting Spanish-language imprints or joining with
Spanish publishers to distribute books.

But in this supremely unscientific business, where market surveys are almost
nonexistent and publishers scowl when asked who actually reads in Spanish (or
any other language for that matter), Pocket Books appears to have found at least
one creative and successful answer.

Last week, Pocket released "Selena!," by Clint Richmond, an instant book about
the Tejano singer who was gunned down in March in Corpus Christi, Tex. But
instead of putting out two separate editions, one for her English-reading fans,
another for the Spanish, Pocket put out a single, bilingual edition.

Hold the 119-page book one way and read it in English. Flip it over and upside
down and read a Spanish translation by Shawn Fields. In the middle are eight
pages of "dramatic photographs" and "dramaticas fotografias" of the 23-year-old
singer crooning before huge crowds, modeling a bustier, and lying in her coffin.
The captions are bilingual as well.

The dual-language idea has been tried before. In the early 1980's Bantam Books,
under the publisher Jack Romanos, used the same format to publish "Fernando," an
unauthorized biography of Fernando Valenzuela, then a rookie pitching phenomenon
for the Los Angeles Dodgers. The book was a big seller.

Now "Selena!" is claiming its own success. The book will appear at the No. 1
spot on the New York Times best-seller list for nonfiction paperbacks on May 21,
knocking "Embraced by the Light," by Betty J. Eadie, to No. 2.

Now in its third printing, the book has been selling especially fast in Texas,
where Selena lived, the publisher said.

First Bombs, Then Books

Where there are heroes and love stories, there will be books about them. The
same goes for scandals and disasters. Charles and Di had their day, twice. So
has O. J.

Now it's Oklahoma City's turn, and before the bomb wreckage has even been
cleared, several publishers have announced plans for books tied to the disaster.
(We're not mentioning the dozens of book proposals that have been submitted to
various publishers, including one from a friend of a doctor who treated some of
the victims.)

In some cases, publishers are dragging backlist books up front, dusting them off
and pitching them as relevant to the issues raised in the Oklahoma bomb attack.

Signet, for one, is reissuing 100,000 copies of its 1990 book "The Silent
Brotherhood," by Kevin Flynn and Gary Gerhardt, which chronicled the Idaho-based
underground militia group that killed Alan Berg, a radio host, in Denver in
1984.

"Warrior Dreams: Paramilitary Culture in Post-Vietnam America" (Hill & Wang), by
James William Gibson, talks about a violent American psyche that emerged after
the Vietnam War. Published last year, the book sold modestly. But Mr. Gibson's
publisher has now rushed 10,000 copies into print, saying the book offers
insights to the bombers' state of mind.

New books are being rushed out too. In a news conference yesterday in Oklahoma
City, Random House announced plans to publish an official volume this fall to
commemorate the victims, their families and the rescue workers involved. "The
Spirit of the Heartland," developed with help from the office of Gov. Frank
Keating of Oklahoma, will draw on the reporting and photography in The Daily
Oklahoman as well as the local fire and police departments. The Governor's wife,
Cathy Keating, approached Random House with the idea, the publisher said.

The book will be published as a nonprofit venture, with any money made being
donated to a relief fund for victims and their families.

HarperCollins has also announced a bomb book to raise money for victims and
their families. "Requiem for the Heartland, the Oklahoma City Bombing" will be
published in association with the Tides Foundation, a San Francisco charity. It
will be a large, squarish 124-page paperback, priced at $19.95, and will include
90 photographs. David Cohen, director of the "Day in the Life" series, will be
editor of the project. All of the photographers, writers and editors are
donating their work.

One Hand Feeding the Other

In one of the dozens of publishing alliances forged recently, Basic Books and
The New Republic have announced an agreement in which the magazine will
participate in the publication and promotion of books brought out under a New
Republic Books imprint.

The magazine will run a feature story on each book's subject before publication,
will provide free advertising space and will sponsor a public event to mark the
book's publication, and will receive a share of the imprint's net profits.

Endnotes

*Tim O'Brien, already a National Book Award winner, has received the James
Fenimore Cooper Prize for 1993-1994 for his novel "In the Lake of the Woods"
(Houghton Mifflin), the story of the effects of the Vietnam War on the life of
an ambitious public figure. The Cooper prize is given biennially for the best
novel on American History. Mr. O'Brien won the National Book Award for fiction
in 1979 for his novel "Going After Cacciato" (Dell).

*After 14 years of research, Grove Dictionaries has announced completion of The
Dictionary of Art, a first-ever 34-volume set that will cover the visual arts of
the world, including 41,000 articles by 6,700 authors from more than 120
countries.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              186 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The F.B.I. Overreaches

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 472 words


Some of the Clinton Administration's top law enforcement officials seem to be
playing a shell game with Americans in the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing,
undoing investigative safeguards they promised to preserve. Jamie Gorelick, the
Deputy Attorney General, and Louis Freeh, the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, declared one day they would not rewrite Justice Department
guidelines that set a careful and appropriate standard for opening and
conducting terrorism investigations. A few days later they outlined an easing of
restrictions -- merely clarifications, they said -- that would grant Federal
agents intrusive new license to investigate constitutionally protected
activities.

The dangers of rewriting criminal laws and reopening the guidelines in the
politically charged aftermath of the bombing are clearly evident in the
Administration's plan. Mr. Freeh told a House subcommittee last week that
guidelines in force for a decade should now be reinterpreted. The existing
guidelines, adopted by the Reagan Administration, restrict domestic terrorism
investigations to cases where there is a reasonable indication that suspicious
groups are engaged in activities that are violent and that violate the law. Mr.
Freeh would now allow F.B.I. investigations if a group merely advocates violence
and its activities might violate Federal law.

The Freeh reinterpretation, endorsed by Ms. Gorelick, tips the balance against
the protection of citizen rights by removing the criminal predicate for
investigation and inviting inquiry into all manner of speech, some possibly
hateful and irresponsible but not necessarily illegal. It gives the F.B.I.,
never a guardian of civil liberties, an opportunity to slip back into abuses
that infringe on political dissent and the support of unpopular ideas.

The United States has learned painfully that freedom of thought and speech is
best protected when law enforcement gives a wide berth even to strong advocacy
unattended by evidence of imminent illegal action. That wisdom informed the
F.B.I. guidelines that were first adopted in 1976 to prevent a recurrence of the
kind of political investigations J. Edgar Hoover once directed against the civil
rights leaders and Vietnam War protesters.

If Mr. Freeh believes that his agents have hesitated to investigate potential
terrorist groups because they feel constrained by the guidelines, the answer is
not to revise the rules under the guise of clarifying them. The answer is to
live by them and to vigorously use the ample investigative tools the bureau
already has.

The rules he so blithely reinterprets were specifically revised by the Reagan
Administration to give the F.B.I. greater latitude in investigating domestic
terrorism. It was not an Administration known to be soft on crime or terrorism.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              187 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
The 'Rambo' Culture

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A;  Page 29;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 727 words


When American liberals woke up to a Republican Congress last fall, they were
equally stunned to discover that a whole other American culture was thriving --
the so-called non-mainstream media in which the news is dispensed by Rush
Limbaugh rather than Peter Jennings and in which William Bennett, not Quentin
Tarantino, rules. But given what we know after Oklahoma City, the geological
fault between the new media and the old now looks like relatively tame stuff:
However much conservatives and liberals may battle, they are still engaged in
the same, albeit angry, conversation.

The far-right America brought into the light since the bombing is something else
-- a true counterculture that slipped under the mainstream's radar and talks
mainly to itself. It has its own talk-radio and Internet stars, theology,
publications and political heroes. You can wallow in its literature for days
without encountering the O. J. Simpson trial or the Contract With America. It is
so far out of the loop that when Ted Koppel held a "Nightline" town meeting in
the militia stronghold of Decter, Mich., after the bombing, the language barrier
was so pronounced he seemed to have stumbled into "Village of the Damned."

Where did this culture come from? Everyone is searching frantically for roots in
other paranoid movements in American history in which fundamentalism, white
supremacism, anti-Semitism and crackpot conspiracy theories produced toxic
explosions of anti-government rage. But easily the most cogent explanation had
been written (and ignored) before Oklahoma City, in a well-documented, scholarly
1994 book Hill & Wang is now rushing back into print: "Warrior Dreams:
Paramilitary Culture in Post-Vietnam America," by James William Gibson, a
sociologist at California State University.

Mr. Gibson dates the birth of this new culture to the confluence of two events
in 1975: the fall of Saigon and the founding of Soldier of Fortune magazine. The
American defeat in Vietnam, Mr. Gibson demonstrates, gave rise among some white
American men to a warrior fantasy, stoked by "Rambo" and other pulp
entertainment, in which a paramilitary loner, often a former Green Beret,
avenges the villains who allegedly cost America the war.

The villains? Liberals, feminists, minorities and the government itself. The
weapons of choice? The combat rifles that had proliferated by the 1980's and
that Soldier of Fortune promoted as a life style.

What makes Mr. Gibson's book startling is that this entire culture has been in
place for two decades, well before the 1990's brought Waco and the militia
movement. "The Turner Diaries," a novel that features the fertilizer-bombing of
a government building and is known to be a favorite of Timothy McVeigh's, has
been a best-selling bible of the paramilitary culture since 1978. Indeed, Mr.
McVeigh's blank stare, military history, known ideology and biography are
anticipated almost uncannily by the fictional Vietnam vet out to cleanse America
of its "scum" in the 1976 movie "Taxi Driver."

When Mr. Gibson was writing in 1994, he could point to only scattered examples
of paramilitary violence spilling beyond weekend-warrior gunplay into real-life
tragedy, notably the 1984 murder of the liberal Denver talk-radio host, Alan
Berg. Even so, "Warrior Dreams" warned of "great danger" and sketched in links
between the paramilitary right and the Christian right, just before the
Christian right began to make significant inroads into the Republican Party.

Exasperated by how easily the mainstream culture either ridiculed or dismissed
the paramilitary culture in its midst, Mr. Gibson wrote that "this terrain must
be explored, mapped and understood if it is ever to be transformed." But even
now, after Oklahoma City, is anyone listening to its voices?

As recently as April 29, to take one example, the author of "The Turner
Diaries," William Pierce, gave an elaborate, rather erudite radio address, later
disseminated by the Internet, in which he predicted that the resentment
generated among "normal Americans" by Jews, politicians, homosexuals, minorities
and "female executives" would lead to more terrorism "on a scale that the world
has never seen before."

Mr. Pierce's words were ignored by the mainstream media. But whether or not we
are listening, there's a well-armed audience out there who is.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              188 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

This Government Worries Many Americans;
Sons of the Klan

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 170 words


To the Editor:

Your May 7 front-page article tracing the right-wing violence of the 1990's to
the left-wing radicalism of the 1960's and to the loss of innocence it brought
about misses the mark.

Today's extremists stem more directly from the Ku Klux Klan and the violent
segregationists of the pre-Vietnam War era. That was hardly the era of good
feeling you suppose. Then as now, the violent right consisted of angry white
males, marching armed and in costume about the countryside, bombing, murdering
and terrorizing innocent people to achieve their political ends.

Then as now, they feared that their fragile hold on an outmoded way of life was
threatened by society's weakest elements, and by a Government that dared to
promote equality.

Then as now, their ideology found resonance within the mainstream.

Then, the vast majority of the American people supported the Federal
Government's effort to crush the violent right. We are no less supportive now.

DOUGLAS H. ROSENBERG
Seattle, May 7, 1995

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              189 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

American Officer's Mission For Haitian Rights Backfires

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1642 words

DATELINE: FORT DRUM, N.Y., May 11


An Army officer who took the words of the nation's Commander in Chief to heart
and went off on his own in search of human-rights violations against Haitian
penitentiary inmates faced a court-martial today with his career and his
conscience on the line.

A panel of five fellow officers sat in judgment of the odd, passionate case of
Capt. Lawrence P. Rockwood, a fourth-generation military man who talked his way
alone into the National Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince last year during the
multinational Haitian incursion in a zealous and unauthorized search for abused
political prisoners.

His one-man mission, intercepted before he could complete it, has ruined his
15-year career and left him facing a possible dishonorable discharge and 10
years in prison. But as he took the stand this morning, the captain defended his
belief in conscience, a belief that was bolstered, he emphasized, by his
soldier-father, who took him as a boy to the Dachau concentration camp in
Germany and taught him about the individual soldier's duty to human rights over
rote obedience.

"He explained why these things exist in the world," Captain Rockwood told the
tribunal here in a simple barracks courthouse.

"What happened there was the result of cynicism and blind obedience," he said,
speaking of Dachau. He justified his prison adventure by invoking international
law and President Clinton's stated concern for "stopping brutal atrocities" as a
main motive for the military intervention in Haiti that began Sept. 19.

Platoons of soldiers jogged past in orderly cadence this morning as the captain
faced charges of leaving his assigned post and disobeying orders. In the view of
the Army, Captain Rockwood was a military intelligence specialist on the loose
in Haiti with a separate agenda and a loaded rifle when he scaled the fence of
his base on the night of Sept. 30 and found his way to the national prison,
announcing that he was there to inspect it for prisoner abuses.

Back at the base, his superiors in the 10th Mountain Division found a note on
the captain's bunk. "I can no longer function in the U.S. forces," it read in
part. "I'm going to do my job and you can court-martial my dead body."

Captain Rockwood's defense is that he heeded too well the words of Mr. Clinton.
The 36-year-old officer said he acted on his own only after he was rebuffed in
various attempts at going through the chain of command and found the military
too preoccupied with protecting its own invasion force to attend properly to the
human-rights abuses in Haiti.

"The chain of command had cowardly failed to carry out the primary objective of
the Commander in Chief," the captain firmly insisted, saying he had to act. "I
felt it was my duty."

Prosecution witnesses characterized the intense, articulate officer as
"misdirected and dangerous" in shouting demands for human-rights investigations
at superiors and "thumbing his nose" at the Army, as Capt. Charles Pede, the
Army's trial counsel, put it.

"He said he was going to complete Bill Clinton's mission," Capt. John Gorley, a
psychiatric nurse, testified as prosecution witnesses presented a picture of
Capt. Rockwood as an obsessed, distraught officer.

The captain countered that he had carefully gathered intelligence information
from a number of sources and was convinced that political prisoners faced
torture and murder in the Port-au-Prince prison, long a target of criticism by
human-rights monitors.

"I felt human life would be lost," he said, arguing that the Army was required
to take action under international law like the Geneva conventions. Hours before
his prison adventure, the captain had accused his own command of dereliction in
a written complaint to the Inspector General of the Army. It was "a
career-terminating move," Captain Rockwood said.

The captain edged toward sarcasm in denouncing military officials and he
bristled when Captain Pede asked whether he claimed broad authority to
selectively reject or reinterpret orders.

"I am personally responsible for carrying out international law," Capt. Rockwood
replied. "That is the Nuremberg principle."

Under the Nuremberg Principles, established by the Allies after World War II, a
crime against world law can be subject to punishment, heads of state can be held
responsible, and obeying orders does not exempt subordinates when there is the
possibility of a moral choice.

The prosecution objected repeatedly to the attempts by the captain's lawyer,
former Attorney General Ramsey Clark, to focus on reports from international
monitoring groups that the Port-au-Prince prison was notorious, with up to 85
percent of the inmates incarcerated for political opposition, not crimes.

The captain's certainty that the prison was the scene of torture and murder was
not borne out by one defense witness, Col. Michael L. Sullivan, a military
police officer who visited the prison on an authorized visit soon after Captain
Rockwood. "I saw no signs of physical torture or abuse," the colonel declared
while testifying that the living conditions were miserable and subhuman, like
those in much of Haiti, and deserved the attention of relief agencies.

Captain Rockwood, who was also supported by the Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights, a private advocacy group, insisted that throngs of political prisoners
in Port-au-Prince were at heightened risk as Haiti's despotic de facto regime
was on the verge of collapse. To superiors' claims that no intelligence reports
of prison abuse in Port-au-Prince were ever received, Captain Rockwood insisted
that the Army never sought them out in the first place.

"I was aware that you are not allowed to walk on the grass to stop a rape," he
said in an interview before he took the stand, referring to the Army's rules
regarding actions that soldiers could take against Haitians. He said at the time
he rated the court-martial risk as negligible in the face of the obligation he
sensed by law and family tradition.

The trial presented a crosscurrent of military and human values, with Mr.
Clark's laconic, sharp-edged interrogation a counterpoise to the terseness and
crisp uniforms and "sirs" of the military witnesses. The presiding judge, Lieut.
Col. Robert Newberry, showed an easy hand and wry demeanor. At one point he
gently sought to establish a "vulgarity spectrum" of words rated bad by one
witness to see if the defendant, hailed by friends as a dedicated and
inoffensive Buddhist, could have used a traditional Army expletive in denouncing
the high command.

The ghosts of old and new armies seemed on trial, too. Prosecution witnesses
hailed Operation Uphold Democracy, the military name for the Haitian incursion,
as a great success under difficult post-cold-war circumstances. But the defense
invoked the history of World War II atrocities and the My Lai massacre in
Vietnam as agonizing milestones pointing to the primacy of Captain Rockwood's
conscience under the conditions he sensed in Haiti.

Once he was inside the prison, the Haitian authorities summoned help from the
United States Embassy. A military attache, Maj. Roland S. Lane, told the court
that he arrived to find a self-righteous and antagonistic captain holding a
loaded weapon and "trying to take action into his own hands" during a "fragile"
period of transition in Haiti.

"I thought, 'This could really turn out nasty,' " the major testified, adding
that Captain Rockwood was "unstable" in fluctuating from calmness to shouting
rages and demanding the right to check on prisoners' conditions. The captain was
eventually talked into unloading the weapon and obeying an order to leave the
prison.

He was taken to an Army hospital for a psychiatric examination and was cleared
as healthy. But he was accused of leaving the hospital without authorization
after he went back to his barracks.

"He's a soft person, a gentle person," Mr. Clark said in discussing the
captain's excited state when confronting superiors. "He became upset because he
knew if he was sent home his work would be severely damaged."

His commander, Lieut. Col. Frank Bragg, testified that Captain Rockwood was
shouting and had a contemptuous attitude after he returned from the prison.
Colonel Bragg said he repeatedly ordered the officer to be silent and "shut up,"
but the captain shouted: "I'm an American officer. I'm not a Nazi officer and I
want a full accounting of human-rights abuses."

Captain Rockwood told the court what he meant was that, under international law,
"there are limitations to military authority and I thought any educated officer
realized that."

Contradicting the defense, Colonel Bragg said Army regulations specifically
barred counterintelligence specialists like Captain Rockwood and himself from
investigating possible prison atrocities. Major Lane said officials from the
State Department and the Justice Department, not from the Army, had prison
responsibilities in the Haiti operation.

Rather than worrying about human-rights abuses in prison, Colonel Bragg said,
the defendant should have been worrying about protecting his fellow soldiers by
tracing arms caches and "getting the bad guys off the streets."

Captain Rockwood's main goal lately has been obtaining the fullest possible
hearing of his cause, for which he opposed prosecution attempts to drop one
charge of conduct unbecoming an officer, a charge that his lawyers say is
crucial to his ability to explain his motives and, if necessary, appeal to
international forums for relief.

In his hospital examination a day after the prison visit, Captain Rockwood was
found healthy by Major Dean Inouye, an Army psychiatrist, who said the captain
lightly amended the words of Henry David Thoreau in commenting on his own
behavior, "I usually march to the beat of a different drummer but yesterday I
was probably a step out of beat."


NAME: Lawrence P. Rockwood

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Capt. Lawrence P. Rockwood at Fort Drum, N.Y., on Wednesday.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              190 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Kent State Questions Remain Unanswered

SECTION: Section A;  Page 30;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


To the Editor:

While I was pleased by the attention paid to the anniversary of the Kent State
University killings, I was disturbed by the paucity of serious deliberation on
the questions that remain unanswered. Having visited Kent State for this
historical observance, I was more than alarmed at revisionist and
unsubstantiated claims about that fateful day in May.

Most disturbing was the statement in the university's commemorative brochure
that "students burned down the R.O.T.C. building" on May 2, 1970. This statement
runs counter to every credible source, including the Federal Bureau of
Investigation report and Justice Department findings.

Such false data invite acceptance of the apologia that the shootings were
justified, based on the fact that students were guilty of arson.

The President's Commission on Campus Unrest concluded that the shootings were
"unwarranted, inexcusable and unnecessary."

Furthermore, a secret memo, discovered by an NBC reporter in 1978, revealed that
President Nixon issued an "eyes only" directive to Attorney General John
Mitchell shortly after the shootings stating, "There will be no Federal
investigation of the incident at Kent State."

Who set the R.O.T.C. fire May 2? Why didn't the authorities arrest those
responsible? Why did the National Guard ignore the constitutional rights of the
students on the Kent State Commons May 4, in what the F.B.I. called a "peaceful
rally"? Why did 28 guardsmen stop their march, spin around 180 degrees, walk
back up a hill and fire for 13 seconds at unarmed students hundreds of feet away
in a distant parking lot and not at students closest to them?

Is it not time to pass the lanterns on to the next generation to seek the
answers?

J. GREGORY PAYNE
Chairman, Communication Studies
Emerson College
Boston, May 7, 1995

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              191 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 13, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Killings That Broke the Spirit Of a Murder-Besieged City

BYLINE: By RICK BRAGG

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1966 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS


Every killing added its own specific grief to the city, like water dripping in a
bucket already too heavy to carry. In all, 21 people died violently in New
Orleans from Feb. 25 to March 4, the bloodiest week in recent memory in a city
with a record-setting murder rate.

New Orleans, where they play jazz at funerals and the procession can break into
a dance, usually heals quickly. But three of the murders that week, in a modest
Vietnamese restaurant in the New Orleans East neighborhood, still haunt this
city more than two months later.

A brother and sister, one planning to be a priest, the other hoping to be a nun,
died on their knees in prayer in the family-owned Kim Anh restaurant at 1:50
A.M. on March 5. A few feet away, a young New Orleans police officer working as
an off-duty security guard was also shot dead. He had a 1-week-old son.

Later that day, the New Orleans police released a picture of the accused killer.
The photograph was cropped so that it showed the suspect only from the neck up.
No one could see her badge.

Prosecutors have charged Antoinette Frank, a 23-year-old New Orleans police
officer, with the murders of the brother, Cuong Vu, 17, his 24-year-old sister,
Ha Vu, and the officer, 25-year-old Ronald Williams. They were killed, the
police said, during a robbery by Officer Frank and an 18-year-old accomplice.

New Orleans is accustomed to killing. It is also accustomed to the breakdown of
morality in its police department: four New Orleans officers have been charged
with murder in the last year.

"But this carried us just a little too far," said the Rev. Thomas G. Glasgow,
the pastor of St. Brigid's Roman Catholic Church. Cuong Vu was his altar boy.

The hurt, laced with anger, is especially deep in the corner of New Orleans East
known as Little Saigon, where the Vu family lived and ran their restaurant.
Here, almost every family has an elder who can remember the brutality and
corruption of war-torn Vietnam, where uniforms were often to be feared.

"They had hoped they had left that behind," said Tommy Tran, a 32-year-old
program analyst who works in New Orleans East and knows the Vu family. "And here
it is again."

Officer Frank, who also worked as an off-duty security guard at the restaurant,
had once been Officer Williams's partner. The Vus considered her a trusted
friend, and Ha Vu had prepared dinner for her less than an hour before the slow,
deliberate gunshots sounded along Bullard Avenue.

Another sister, Chau Vu, 23, ducked inside a walk-in freezer when the shooting
started, and later told the police what happened.

"She did this to my family," Ms. Vu said of Officer Frank. "God teaches us to
forgive, but I do not know if I can."

The hurt also lingers in the Catholic neighborhood where the officer people knew
as Ronnie Williams grew up.

"I think the police motto is, 'To protect and serve,' " said Brother Ronald
Hingle, Mr. Williams's high school algebra teacher. "I just felt, 'How much
faith can we place in that?' "

The horror and sense of betrayal caused by the killings have crossed all lines
of race and class. There has been talk by some residents that the deaths might
be a catalyst for change. Others dismissed that hope as civic cheerleading.

In the darkened Kim Anh, Nguyet Nguyen, the mother of Ha and Cuong Vu, sat
recently with tears ruining her makeup, explaining in Vietnamese what the
killers had done. She talked a long time.

A friend, struggling to make Nguyet Nguyen's feelings clear in his limited
English, tried to interpret. "They broke everything," he finally said.

What he meant was, her life is in pieces.

Callings
2 Siblings Share Spiritual Dreams

The statue of the Madonna outside St. Brigid's Church has almond-shaped eyes.

The eyes, Asian eyes, "are by design," said Father Glasgow, whose congregation
is largely Vietnamese. Assimilation has its boundaries in a place like New
Orleans East, a lowland where fishermen in conical straw hats search for crabs
in the bayous beside three-bedroom homes with blue aluminum siding.

Nguyet Nguyen and her children came to the United States from Vietnam four years
ago, reuniting with a husband and father they had not seen for 10 years. They
worked together to make the restaurant a small success, but Ha and Cuong had
another career -- a calling, really -- in mind.

It is common, after death, to trim the rough edges from a person's character.
But the people who remember Ha and Cuong Vu said there was no need to smooth
over their lives.

Ha Vu, a soft-spoken young woman who was the restaurant's cook, wanted to become
a nun as soon as the family's business was firmly established. She had attended
a local college but dropped out because it was too expensive.

Over and over, people referred to her as "delicate," "innocent" and deeply
spiritual. She never had a boyfriend.

"You can feel it in the air," Msgr. Dominic Luong, an advocate for the
Vietnamese community who knew the young woman, said of the community's sadness.

Cuong Vu would have made a good priest, Father Glasgow said. Even before the boy
could speak English, Cuong was following the pastor around, helping at the
church.

"His countenance did not know anger," Father Glasgow said. "He was sublime. I
will miss him. I will miss him very much."

To the Vietnamese people here, the killings brought back memories of a world
they had fled.

The Vietnamese communities in New Orleans, in the eastern part of the city and
across the Mississippi River on the West Bank, have been slow to extend their
trust. Instead of trusting banks, they often used "collective financing" --
several businesses chipping in to help start a new one, or to help it expand.

Rumors that the Vu family had hidden such pooled financing at their restaurant
may have led to the robbery.

And instead of relying on governments to protect them, the immigrants hired
their own guards.

"In Vietnam the police are corrupt," said Monsignor Luong, the pastor at Mary
Queen of Vietnam Church in New Orleans East.

When the police in New Orleans were slow to respond to calls at their
businesses, the Vietnamese, like many other business owners here, bought their
loyalty by offering them off-duty security jobs.

That is how the Vu family came to know Officers Williams and Frank, both of whom
had worked for them off and on over the last year.

"I hired them to take care of my family," Nguyet Nguyen said. "She killed them."


Dress Blues
Same Uniforms, Different Sides

The killing of Officer Williams, the first case in which one New Orleans police
officer has been charged in the murder of another, leaves the department in
alien territory. In the past, when officers were charged with crimes, the
department often just closed ranks. But there is no "blue wall of silence" now,
no apparent cover-ups.

"His funeral procession just went on and on, forever and ever," Lieut. Sam
Fradella said of the service for Officer Williams. Hundreds of officers, from
police departments all over the country, marched behind the coffin. As the
procession passed, cars pulled over to the curb and people got out to pay their
respects.

At the time of his death, Officer Williams seemed to be building a solid career.
He had saved a child from drowning, but even police heroes in New Orleans have
to work overtime to pay their bills.

The new baby, whom he and his wife, Mary, named Patrick Austin, would need
things: food, clothes, toys. The couple already had a 5-year-old son,
Christopher. Moonlighting at the Kim Anh restaurant seemed like easy duty, safe
duty.

Brother Hingle, Officer Williams's high school teacher, attended his wake. He
sat with the slain officer's mother and told stories about Ronnie Williams in
life. Sometimes they even laughed a little. But it is his death that will
register on the history of New Orleans.

"Probably the whole city has been changed because of this," Brother Hingle said.
"He is a symbol for the community. He has been made so."

Officer Frank, according to her service record and in the views of officers who
served with her, should probably never have been in uniform in the first place,
even in a department considered among the most corrupt in the nation.

She failed a psychological exam that is a prerequisite for the police academy,
but the academy accepted a second opinion, from her own doctor. It is a regular
practice in a department that in recent years has often had to lower its
standards to match its pay, veteran officers said.

Ms. Frank joined the force in August 1993, but just a few months later superiors
recommended that she be returned to the academy for retraining. Her incident
reports were sometimes incomprehensible, and fellow officers complained about
irrational behavior.

The police now believe that she may have used her badge to steal from drug
dealers with the help of Roger Lacaze, the 18-year-old laborer who has been
charged as her accomplice in the Kim Anh killings. Mr. Lacaze, a fried of
Officer Frank, had been booked on weapons and battery charges, but the cases
were never pursued by the district attorney's office.

"This tells us we have to do a better job of screening our applicants,"
Lieutenant Fradella said.

Officer Frank's lawyer, Robert Jenkins, maintained his client's innocence,
saying she had nothing to do with the killings or robbery. Other officers have
tried to paint her as a bad cop to distance her from the department and make it
easier to prosecute her, he said.

Mr. Jenkins paints a picture of a woman who grew up poor in a small town outside
Baton Rouge, who always dreamed of being a police officer. She lived in a tiny
house on Michigan Street and was not involved in anything illegal, he said.

He described her as a solid officer whose application had been endorsed by
judges and other respected people in New Orleans. Her application form to the
department was even signed by then-Mayor Sidney Barthelemy, he said, instead of
the usual city official.

Mr. Barthelemy has since said his name was faked on the form.

Mr. Jenkins said his client went to the Kim Anh that night to pick up the meal
she had ordered. "She didn't shoot anyone," he said.

The Killings
Officers Respond; One Is Accused

The crime, as described by the police, was brutally simple but inexplicable in
its meanness: Officer Frank and Mr. Lacaze came to the restaurant to rob it, and
shoot the witnesses.

Police said the robbers shot Officer Williams near the bar. Then they shot the
two siblings.

Prosecutors and investigators are not talking about who shot whom, except to say
that both Officer Frank and Mr. Lacaze fired their guns.

Mr. Jenkins said that Officer Frank knew there were others in the restaurant,
and he argued that it would have made no sense for her to shoot some witnesses
and leave others alive to testify against her.

Chau Vu and her brother, Quoc Vu, hid in the restaurant when the shooting
started. Later, when Officer Frank came back to the restaurant with other
officers, as though she were responding to the call, Chau Vu pointed at her and
told other officers that Ms. Frank had killed her brother and sister and Officer
Williams.

Later that day, the police said that Officer Frank had confessed to the killings
and that she and Mr. Lacaze had implicated each other. But Mr. Jenkins now says
that the police confused her statement with a confession and that she never said
she killed anyone.

Officer Frank and Mr. Lacaze were indicted on April 27 on three counts of
first-degree murder.

The intensity of grief, more than two months after the slayings, still touches
Father Glasgow. It is as if his city is locked in a box with its pain.

"This is not the true New Orleans," the pastor said. "The true New Orleans is a
place that celebrates life."

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Antoinette Frank, charged in killings that haunt New Orleans.
(Associated Press); Nguyet Nguyen, who came to the United States with her
children from Vietnam four years ago, says her life is in pieces since the
killing of her son and daughter, Cuong and Ha Vu, on March 5. In her home in New
Orleans last month, she placed incense in front of pictures of her slain
children. (Matt Anderson for The New York Times)(pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              192 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 13, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Auto Makers in Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 35;  Column 6;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 29 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 12


The Vietnamese Government plans next month to give the Ford Motor Company and
the Toyota Motor Corporation clearance to build auto plants, according to a
senior official.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 13, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Remembering Waco, and Stealing It

BYLINE: By Dick J. Reavis;   Dick J. Reavis is author of the forthcoming "The
Ashes of Waco: An Investigation."

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 19;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: DALLAS


The timing of the Oklahoma City bombing, two years to the day after the Federal
raid on David Koresh's followers outside Waco, Tex., raised the question of a
connection. And, indeed, there is apparently a link between the two April 19
tragedies -- but it does not run both ways. The raid on the compound at Mount
Carmel has led to a political crusade, albeit one that the survivors haven't
joined and don't even approve of.

On April 19, about 200 people gathered for a memorial at Mount Carmel, which
today bears little resemblance to the site of the 51-day standoff of 1993. All
that's left is a single pile, about 10 feet high, of boards, concrete chunks,
rags, twisted bicycles and go-carts.

About 40 of those attending survived the siege and assault or lost a family
member in it. Most, however, came not only to remember the dead but to celebrate
the burgeoning movements for which Mount Carmel is a battle cry. They called
themselves constitutionalists or patriots or militiamen. Some were wearing
camouflage and carrying rifles.

A dozen speakers were scheduled, including Clive Doyle and David Thibodeau, who
had come out of the 1993 inferno alive. But the key speeches were given by
others.

Ramsey Clark, the Attorney General under President Lyndon B. Johnson, was the
best-known. Though he's a dyed-in-the-wool liberal in favor of "the abolition of
all guns," he filed suit against the Government last month, alleging that it was
responsible for the deaths at Mount Carmel.  Mr. Clark arched his back against
the rain and cited Justice Louis D. Brandeis: "The right to be let alone is the
most comprehensive of all rights and the right most cherished by civilized men."

The favorite for much of the crowd was an unscheduled speaker, the survivalist
James "Bo" Gritz, a highly decorated Vietnam veteran and a hero to the many
militias of the right.  Mr. Gritz told the crowd that on April 18, 1993, while
in a Las Vegas bar, he had laid plans to foil the Government's barricades and
steal into Mount Carmel, hoping to negotiate.

"Friends," he said, "the Government has turned from protector into predator, and
they are plundering the people and their property." The "patriots" cheered, but
the former residents of Mount Carmel -- who never called themselves "Branch
Davidians" -- were perplexed, and even offended.

Ofelia Santoyo, who lost her daughter and five grandchildren in the raid, tugged
my sleeve. "Who are those men in uniform?" she whispered. I sensed her fear; the
last time she saw gun-toting men in military garb, she was surrendering to
Federal agents.

"They are member of the Texas Constitutional Militia," I told her. "The who?"
she said. I replied, "Don't worry, they're not from the Government."

Before the service was concluded, as news of the Oklahoma City bombing spread
through the crowd, the media were already speculating that the bomb had been
planted by David Koresh's faithful. No charge could have been more unlikely.
Only a dozen able-bodied male followers lived through the siege. Seven are in
prison, three were at the memorial service when the bomb went off and the others
were overseas.

More important, there's a matter of doctrine. For theological reasons, none of
the survivors can take revenge.

They believe that the fifth seal from the Book of Revelation governed the Waco
events and has not closed yet. Revelation 6:9-11 reads: "And when he had opened
the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God." The survivors think that the verse refers to the dead at Mount
Carmel. On the subject of revenge, the Scripture advises: "They should rest yet
for a little season, until their fellowservants also and their brethren, that
should be killed as they were." They interpret these words as saying that their
own deaths must precede any vengeance.

Yes, sometimes the survivors do shed tears for their loss -- they did when Clive
Doyle read the names of the dead. But they regard the Government as lost, not as
evil.  The harsher criticisms that their sympathizers hurl at the Federal
agencies don't always sit well with them.

"I had originally said that I didn't want any Government-bashing," complained
Mr. Doyle, the chief organizer of the event. Sheila Martin, who lost her husband
and four children in the blaze, agreed. "Certain people I speak to in this
situation want us to be angrier than we are," she told me. "It's as if what
happened was their problem and not ours."

After the names of the dead were recited, members of the Texas Constitutional
Militia fired a 21-gun salute. Then the survivors placed 82 small white crosses
beneath 82 newly planted crape myrtle trees, one for each of those who died.
When the service was over, the former residents of Mount Carmel resumed their
search for biblical consolation, while the rest of the crowd presumably looked
for meaning in the newborn infamy of April 19.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 14, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1435 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   3   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2          1   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) Over the years, a prosecutor finds that an
                unusual murder case haunts her career and private life.

 3      2  63   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 4      3   3   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 5      4  47   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 6      5   6   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 7      6  12   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 8      8   6   A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy,
                a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.

 9      9  144  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 10     7   3   CHILDREN OF THE JEDI, by Barbara Hambly. (Spectra/Bantam,
                $21.95.) The "Star Wars" New Republic sends a mission to find
                long-lost people.

 11    10  30   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 12    11   9   OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny
                and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold-war
                era.

 13         1   BEAUTY FROM ASHES, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A
                Georgia family endures the divisive stresses of the Civil War.

 14    13  10   THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The
                unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish
                town.

 15    15   8   PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four
                poems celebrating women.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   3   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 2      2  31   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus.

 3      3  13   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) Governmental regulations.

 4      4  20   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 5      5  62   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6         11   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive
                business strategies.

 7      6   4   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.)
                Rituals and spiritual journeys.

 8      7   4   QUIVERS, by Robin Quivers. (Regan Books/HarperCollins, $22.)
                Howard Stern's sidekick's memoirs.

 9     13   3   MODEL, by Michael Gross. (Morrow, $25.) The growth of modeling
                into a huge industry.

 10*    8   9   BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus.
                (Random House, $23.) A memoir.

 11     9   2   MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                actress reminisces about Hollywood.

 12*   10   7   THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank. Edited by Otto H.
                Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive
                edition."

 13    12   3   IN SEARCH OF STONES, by M. Scott Peck. (Hyperion, $22.95.) An
                odyssey in quest of faith and reason.

 14    11  36   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage.

 15*   14  18   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 16*        8   BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) How
                computers will alter our lives in the future.

 17*        8   AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.)
                People with neurological afflictions.

 18*   15  73   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  103  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      1   8   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 3      3   5   MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Maintaining passion.

 4      4   2   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 29, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

EXCELLENT CADAVERS: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic, by
Alexander Stille. (Pantheon, $27.50.) This fascinating and horrifying
examination, based on immense piles of documents, shows how in the last 25 years
the Mafia has terrorized Sicilian society and perverted Italian politics.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

LANDSCAPE AND MEMORY, by Simon Schama. (Knopf, $40.) A learned and perceptive
survey of Western attitudes toward nature in the last five centuries; Mr.
Schama's starting point is the Renaissance fascination with river, forest and
mountain as signs of a revered prototypal world.

MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE, by Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly
unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who
narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.

MEN IN BLACK, by Scott Spencer. (Knopf, $23.) A smart, affectionate comic novel
in which an honorable but unsuccessful novelist's life is overturned when his
pseudonymous potboiler about extraterrestrials becomes a best seller.

A MOMENT ON THE EARTH: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism, by Gregg
Easterbrook. (Viking, $27.95.) Essays on the most complex of modern subjects,
treating our considerable environmental accomplishments and our puzzling neglect
of threats (diseases, for instance) in other people's backyards.

NOAH'S CHOICE: The Future of Endangered Species, by Charles C. Mann and Mark L.
Plummer. (Knopf, $24.) The authors persuasively contend that humans will decide,
by default or by intention, who goes extinct, and at present have not a clue how
to do so wisely.

OSWALD'S TALE: An American Mystery, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.)
Stoked by a passion to believe J.F.K.'s death was more than a meaningless
absurdity, Mr. Mailer pursues and delivers the assassin's very slightly
significant soul, using his own research and that of others.

REDEYE: A Western, by Clyde Edgerton. (Algonquin, $17.95.) An elaborate,
unbelievable plot, chock-full of believable, well-developed characters, sustains
this woolly western by an admirable Southern novelist.

RULE OF THE BONE, by Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $22.) A novel that
reinvigorates the Huck Finn myth in the person of Chappie, a mall rat from
upstate New York who lights out for Jamaica with a runaway farm worker.

THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE: A Novel of the Limehouse Murders, by Peter Ackroyd.
(Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) A claustrophobic, agitated novel of London in
1880; everyone (including a clutch of famous contemporary reformers) is
connected to everyone else.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Pow! Splat! It's the Summer Movie Onslaught

BYLINE: By ANITA GATES

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1732 words


WHEN GENE HACKMAN AND DENZEL WASHINGTON GOT GOOD AND MAD over whether to fire
their nuclear submarine's missiles and start World War III in "Crimson Tide,"
which opened on Friday, they definitely began the summer movie wars. Here are
some choices that lie ahead.   ANITA GATES

ACTION HEROES IN MOTION

DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE
Bruce Willis in New York taxis and on subways. Jeremy Irons is the terrorist
villain, whose amusements include blowing up fashionable department stores.
Opening Friday.


APOLLO 13
Tom Hanks in a space capsule and in big trouble, along with his fellow
astronauts Kevin Bacon and Bill Paxton. Ed Harris and Gary Sinise are on the
ground in Houston, biting their nails. June 30.

UNDER SIEGE II: DARK TERRITORY
Eric Bogosian on a train, as a terrorist threatening to nuke the East Coast.
Little does he know that a fellow passenger, a mild-mannered chef, is Steven
Seagal. July 14.

ACTION HEROES IN FUNNY OUTFITS

BRAVEHEART
Mel Gibson in a kilt as a 13th-century Scottish freedom fighter. Lots of
primitive battle scenes (think Conan the Scotsman) and what appears to be a
one-night stand with the Princess of Wales. May 24.

BATMAN FOREVER
Val Kilmer in a redesigned Batsuit. Chris O'Donnell as Robin, with an earring.
Jim Carrey and Tommy Lee Jones as co-villains. June 16.


FIRST KNIGHT
Richard Gere in armor as Lancelot. Sean Connery as King Arthur and Julia Ormond
as Guinevere. The triangle from the point of view of that sexy loner Lancelot.
July 7.

WILD BILL
Jeff Bridges and Ellen Barkin in cowboy hats. The third depiction of Calamity
Jane this year. Aug. 4.

SCARY FUTURE

JUDGE DREDD
In the 22d century, there are no cops, lawyers or juries -- just judges. The top
judge, Sylvester Stallone, gets very angry after Armand Assante frames him for
murder. Some DNA evidence throws them both. June 30.

WATERWORLD
Kevin Costner with gills, on an Earth covered with water. The polar icecaps have
melted, and pirates have made a big comeback, led by Dennis Hopper. Filmed in
Hawaii on a scary budget. July 28.

SAFE
Julianne Moore, a housewife in the not-too-distant future, learns that her
allergies are really an environmental illness. Whisked away to a New Age
retreat, she may not be in good hands. June 23.

SCARY PRESENT

KIDS
Three teen-agers devote 24 hours to doing everything they're not supposed to --
mostly drugs and unsafe sex. July 21.

MR. 247
A desperate workaholic Manhattanite (Lisa Eichhorn) wants true love and a baby
but settles for a sperm bank. Then she meets the donor. August.

BEYOND RANGOON
Patricia Arquette makes a bad vacation choice (Burma in 1988), has her passport
stolen and gets to stick around for the revolution. Aug. 25.

HIGH TECH/SCI-FI

JOHNNY MNEMONIC
A cyberpunk thriller with Keanu Reeves. In the 21st century, messengers simply
carry chips implanted in their brains. Johnny (Mr. Reeves) is carrying the cure
for a dread disease, needs to download fast (or die) and is being chased by the
Japanese mob. May 26.

SPECIES
A monster named Sil, who is here because scientists just weren't thinking. They
get a message from aliens saying, "Here's some DNA: combine it with yours" --
and they do. Then Sil, who is built like a "Baywatch" extra when she isn't in
her monster form, wants to have a baby. July 7.

VIRTUOSITY
A monster named Sid, who is here because the Los Angeles Police Department of
1999 wasn't thinking. Sid (Russell Crowe) is a virtual-reality supercriminal who
escapes into the real world, only to encounter an ex-cop (Denzel Washington)
with his own "Death Wish" subplot going on. Aug. 4.

HACKERS
A cyberpunk thriller without Keanu Reeves. Young computer geniuses live for the
Internet and love wreaking havoc with faraway cash machines. Aug. 11.

THE NET
Talk about a woman losing her own identity when she gets into a relationship!
Sandra Bullock, a lonely systems analyst, meets a handsome man (Jeremy Northam)
on a Mexican beach vacation and soon finds her entire life erased from the
world's computers. Aug. 4.

THE INNER CITY

TALES FROM THE HOOD
Three men visit a funeral home looking for drugs (last seen with the corpse) and
are held hostage by the mortician (Clarence Williams 3d) who loves to tell scary
stories (voodoo dolls that come to life, dead people crawling out of their
graves, etc.). May 24.

THE GLASS SHIELD
The token woman and the token black (Lori Petty and Michael Boatman) in a Los
Angeles sheriff's office discover (surprise!) that some cops are corrupt. June
2.

DEAD PRESIDENTS
A young man (Larenz Tate) comes home from Vietnam shocked to find his
neighborhood changed by drugs and poverty, and so annoyed that he organizes an
armored car heist. July.

MY POSSE DON'T DO HOMEWORK
A tough teacher, an ex-marine with unorthodox methods, changes some ghetto
teen-agers' lives. For starters, the boys' concentration skills are sharpened
when the teacher looks like Michelle Pfeiffer. July 28.

DATE MOVIES

FORGET PARIS
Billy Crystal and Debra Winger meet in Paris and have the quintessential
romantic courtship. Then they marry, move to Los Angeles and have to deal with
careers, resentments and the absence of the Eiffel Tower. Friday.

MAD LOVE
Two wild and crazy teen-agers (Drew Barrymore and Chris O'Donnell) run away
together to make their own rules. May 26.

THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY
A middle-aged Iowa housewife (Meryl Streep) and a visiting middle-aged
photographer (Clint Eastwood) have a deeply meaningful fling. June 2.

NINE MONTHS
Hugh Grant gets fear of commitment when his girlfriend (Julianne Moore) gets
pregnant. Their friends just make things worse. July 14.

A WALK IN THE CLOUDS
Keanu Reeves and magic realism in California wine country. A poor World War II
G.I. in love with a rich Mexican-American vineyard owner's daughter. July 28.

LOVE AND LAUGHTER

AN AWFULLY BIG ADVENTURE
Hugh Grant camping it up as the vicious gay director of a small 1950's British
theater company. A wide-eyed teen-ager (Georgina Cates) falls in love with him.
Think "Bullets Over Liverpool." July 21.

TO DIE FOR
A housewife (Nicole Kidman) so obsessed with becoming an anchorwoman that she
names her dog Walter Cronkite. With a singlemindedness that would make Faye
Dunaway in "Network" proud, she arranges to have a career obstacle (her husband,
Matt Dillon) eliminated, with the help of her teen-age lover (Joaquin Phoenix).
July 21.

CLUELESS
Jane Austen's "Emma 90210." A rich teen-ager (Alicia Silverstone) decides
everyone around her needs a makeover. July 28.

JEFFREY
A young gay New Yorker decides to give up sex because of AIDS. Then, of course,
he meets the man of his dreams. Aug. 4.

MALL RATS
Shannen Doherty and other young people with too much time on their hands. Kevin
Smith, who wrote and directed "Clerks," makes his move here, from a convenience
store to more upscale outlets. Aug. 11.

THE BROTHERS McMULLEN
Three Irish-American brothers try to figure out women (one likens a man in a
relationship to a banana being peeled against its will) and the religious
teachings of their childhood (e.g., living in sin). Originally filmed on a
budget that wouldn't cover a down payment on a small co-op. Aug. 9.

THE DARK SIDE (NOIR)

LITTLE ODESSA
Brighton Beach without Neil Simon. Tim Roth, Edward Furlong and Vanessa Redgrave
in a tragedy about love, family and the Russian mob. Friday.

MUTE WITNESS
Moscow without Chekhov. An American makeup artist who can't speak, a snuff film
(or was it really?) and the Russian mob. July 28.

THE USUAL SUSPECTS
Friends without honor. Stephen Baldwin, Gabriel Byrne, Chazz Palminteri, one
night in jail and a $91 million deal among thieves. Aug. 18.

THE DARK SIDE (HORROR)

HELLRAISER IV
Pinhead. Again. Aug. 11.

MORTAL KOMBAT
Three humans in an ancient, otherworldly tournament with lots of sharp, pointed
objects. Based on the painfully popular video game. Aug. 18.

LORD OF ILLUSIONS
Scott Bakula against a somewhat dead magician and a force of evil who announces,
"I was born to murder the world." Aug. 25.

THE PROPHECY
Armageddon in the Arizona desert, with Christopher Walken as a fallen angel and
Eric Stoltz as a good one. Sept. 1.

KID STUFF

CASPER
You're a friendly ghost who feels alienated because you scare people without
meaning to; now your landlady wants you exorcised. Who ya gonna call? A ghost
therapist (Bill Pullman) and his daughter (Christina Ricci). May 26.

POCAHONTAS
A sexy, New Age American Indian princess meets a 17th-century English settler
with Mel Gibson's voice. Disney's animated version of the story includes a
talking tree (an ancestor's spirit is inside) and precious little animal friends
like Flit the hummingbird and Meeko the raccoon. June 23.

MIGHTY MORPHIN POWER RANGERS: THE MOVIE
New Zords and a purple villain. June 30.

THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD
A 9-year-old boy puts a tiny plastic American Indian inside an old cupboard, and
the toy comes to life. Unfortunately, so does a tiny plastic cowboy. July 14.

THE BABY-SITTERS CLUB
Junior high school girls open a backyard day-care center. Tragically, there are
no classes in zoning, licensing or community relations in the seventh grade.
Aug. 18.

ANIMAL STARS

FLUKE
A dog starts having flashbacks and learns that he was once a man (Matthew
Modine, in fact). Naturally he sets off to find his wife and son. June 2.

CONGO
While greedy corporate humans look for the diamonds of the lost African city of
Zinj, Amy, a gorilla who knows sign language, meets some ape-like creatures who
are "too damn smart," as one character says (this is based on a Michael Crichton
novel). Maybe that's why the last expedition mysteriously disappeared? June 9.

FREE WILLY II:
THE ADVENTURE HOME
Jason James Richter runs into his whale friend Willy on a camping trip. Then
animatronic Willy and his new siblings get into oil-spill trouble. July 21.

OPERATION DUMBO DROP
How do you sneak an elephant (one who gets seasick) across Vietnam in 1968?
Danny Glover and Ray Liotta are the American soldiers who give it a try. July
14.

BABE
The story of a pig who wants to be a sheepdog. And isn't bad at it. Aug. 4.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bruce Willis, left, in "Die Hard With a Vengeance"; below, Val
Kilmer and Chris O'Donnell, in "Batman Forever." Michelle Pfeiffer, left, in "My
Posse Don't Do Homework"; above, Bill Paxton, Kevin Bacon and Tom Hanks in
"Apollo 13"; below, Richard Gere and Julia Ormond in "First Knight." Denzel
Washington, left, in "Virtuosity"; above left, Marina Sudina in "Mute Witness";
above, "Pocahontas"; top right, Hugh Grant in "Nine Months"; right, Clint
Eastwood and Meryl Streep in "The Bridges of Madison County."

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends: Just Say 'I Dunno';
Half a Wit Meets Technology

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1393 words


SUMMER is coming. It's time for all patriots to prepare to exercise their
all-American right to read lowest-common-denominator fiction, swill reruns and
make Hollywood blockbusters into box-office hits.

And why not? Isn't stupidity in fashion? People flock to movies that lionize
fools. They scarf up books billed as being for dummies. On the airwaves, they
shoot their mouths off about things they know little about (and millions tune in
to hear).

Could it be that the technical complexity of contemporary life -- installing a
fax modem, programming the phone -- has left us so rattled that it has become an
act of defiance to idolize goofballs and advertise oneself as one?




Lovable Fools

Remarkably, plenty of smart people and professional contrarians say no. They
insist they haven't noticed that dumb is suddenly in vogue. They muster an
impressive array of counter-arguments that go like this:

* It's not new. Dumb, or something like it, is all-American.
Anti-intellectualism, at least, is almost a national trait. And it's healthy. No
democracy wants an aristocracy of intelligence telling it how to behave.

* The fool has long been a stock comic figure in popular culture. Take Jerry
Lewis, the Three Stooges, Punch and Judy. And many humorists, like Will Rogers,
have long based their appeal on being just plain folks.

* What ails us isn't dumbness, it's something else. Maybe it's media
sensationalism, but that's not new. Or perhaps viciousness in political
discourse is on the rise; but that, too, comes and goes.

* Anyway, who's to say what's dumb? Or, as Jack Romanos, president of Simon &
Schuster Consumer Publishing Group, put it: "What makes anyone think Howard
Stern is not an intellectual?" (Mr. Romanos's company publishes Mr. Stern.)

It's true, braininess has never been Americans' most popular trait. Americans
value good, old common sense. Notions like equality and individualism encourage
the belief that each person is as capable as the next.

It's also true that anti-intellectualism appears to ebb and flow -- coinciding
sometimes with bad economic times, sometimes with religiously-based political
and fundamentalist movements. It surfaced in the 1920's around the time of the
Scopes trial. Later, "pinko" professors were a favorite target of Senator Joseph
McCarthy, and Adlai Stevenson was derided as an "egghead." Historians say it
returned in response to protests against the Vietnam War.

In Ronald Reagan, Americans eagerly found wisdom in ignorance. And now, even
members of Congress with Ph.D.'s seem to find it useful to enlist the language
of anti-intellectualism in attacking the cultural elite.




Stupidity on a Pedestal

On the whole, intellectuals tend to be laughed at, loathed or ignored, said
Stanley Katz, president of the American Council of Learned Societies. In the
United States, he and others say, intellectual is a dirty word. But what is
happening now may not exactly be an anti-intellectual resurgence (though some
say that is happening, too). People say they see signs of a positive embracing
of stupidity, a glorifying of dumbness.

O.K., maybe some of these films are about innocence, not idiocy. But what about
"Tommy Boy" and "Dumb and Dumber"? What about "Beavis and Butt-head" on TV? Due
out in theaters soon: "The Stupids."

IDG Books has printed 18 million copies of its wildly successful " . . . for
Dummies" series -- leaping from "PCs for Dummies" to activities once thought
manageable. Like parenting and, yes, sex. Macmillan Computer Publishing has
followed suit with "Complete Idiot" guides.

In public life, politicians hide their expertise to curry favor with voters.
They profess to hate politics, just like everyone else. Washington insiders run
as outsiders against Washington. The public laps it up.

On talk radio, on the Internet and in public-opinion polling, the unabashed step
forward in limitless supply, solicited by Rush Limbaugh and others to opine
about anything, whether they know about it or not. "Let me get back to you on
that after I've done some reading" is not an option in polls, Michael Kinsley
pointed out recently in The New Yorker, bemoaning the celebration of "ignorant
opinion and undifferentiated rage."

Plenty of people see nothing new in all this. They say an American's God-given
right has always been to shoot his mouth off. Just because more people now have
a chance to do it doesn't make for a vogue of dumbness. "There are more people
engaged now in the national dialogue," said Garry Wills. "People who were silent
before are now being heard. That doesn't mean they have become any dumber. They
may have become smarter."

Tom Wolfe, too, says he hasn't noticed anything different. The media are simply
more vivid. Instead of comic books, we have "comic books put on the screen. I
don't think the appetite changes over decades."

Among those who suspect the appetite has indeed changed, many round up the usual
suspects: Critics blame the media, the media blame Hollywood, Hollywood blames
capitalism and popular tastes.

But more than a few people suggest a couple of other culprits: the increasing
technical complexity of contemporary life, and certain anxieties about the
country's economic future and its place in the world.

When David G. Israel, vice president of publishing for Macmillan Computer
Publishing USA, joined the company several years back, he used to joke in
meetings that the company needed a book called "Yo, Stupid! It's a Computer."

"There is almost an assumption that there is a technological elite that makes
everyone else feel a little inferior," he said. "People do feel a little bit
stupid -- or like idiots -- about things."

Then IDG's " . . . for Dummies" series took off The gimmick now works with more
than computers. "The logic is, well, computers aren't the only thing that people
feel inadequate about," Mr. Israel said.

The titles, course, work on two levels. For those with some vestige of
self-esteem, there's something deliciously self-deprecating and ironic about
embracing the label of idiot while mastering something quite so clever as Unix.

An argument similar to Mr. Israel's can be made on a grander scale. Andrew Ross,
director of the graduate program in American Studies at New York University,
traces some of the taste for dumbness to a knowledge-based society.

The growing emphasis on specialized expertise has made people anxious about
being left behind. At a time when white men, in particular, are said to be
feeling pangs of lost privilege, "Forrest Gump" comes along. "Here you have a
white male of fairly limited intelligence who still manages to have a profound
impact on culture and politics," Professor Ross said. That narrative has special
appeal, he said, when people are being shunted into mindless, low-wage jobs.

As Professor Ross puts it, popular culture may be giving voice to anxieties
about "the power exercised by knowledge elites," and it may be expressing a
backlash against challenges to white-male privilege. "Some people would say it's
an awful lot of sociological baggage to overload upon these things," he said.
"But some of us take popular culture very seriously."

Others think they see something similar at work.

Robert Pollack, a professor of biological sciences and former dean of Columbia
College, is struck these days by the "willful naivete" that many students "want
to maintain in the face of a complicated world." He describes this as "a wish to
remain innocent: If I don't understand the complexity, it doesn't bother me." He
said many students' "fix on the world is that it is a place to outwit, not a
place to help run."




Idiocy as a Survival Skill

"It's a misplaced sense of how to survive" in a society in economic decline, he
said. "It's the academic equivalent of a girl who dumbs herself down on a date
-- to pass by appearing to be less curious than you are."

One day recently, Richard Amyx, a computer-industry middle manager in San Jose,
Calif., and chairman of American Mensa Ltd., the high-IQ society (which, by the
way, just bailed out of Brooklyn and moved its headquarters to an office tower
in Fort Worth), was appalled to read on a bumper sticker: My kid just beat up
your honors student.

"That encapsulates the attitude right there," Mr. Amyx said glumly.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

1995 N.B.A. PLAYOFFS;
A Towering Presence And a Complex Figure

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor Jr. was almost always taller than anyone else his age;
this is a central definer of his public and private life. He was always far
away. He was also usually smarter and more sensitive. It is no surprise that
Alcindor will be inducted into basketball's Hall of Fame tomorrow, as Kareem
Abdul-Jabbar. Or that he is still what he seemed to be as a teen-ager, a seeker,
one of SportsWorld's more complex, fascinating, evolving characters.

I have followed him ever since the day, almost precisely 30 years ago, when I
gave him some career guidance. This was on May 4, 1965, when he held his first
press conference, in the gym at Power Memorial High School in Manhattan, to
announce that he was going to U.C.L.A. He seemed very sweet and serious, even
when someone asked, "Are there any liabilities in being tall in basketball?" He
waited a polite beat before answering, "None that I can think of."

The news media wouldn't have a handle on Alcindor for a long time. New York high
schools had already gotten into the business of exporting tall young black men
who could do everything with a basketball but read the label. But Alcindor was
an only child who had been brought up in a predominately white neighborhood
where he played Little League. He spent a lot of time alone in his room,
listening to music, reading, fantasizing about the Lone Ranger and the heroes of
Sir Walter Scott. He would be the tall, dark stranger, suddenly riding to the
rescue. Meanwhile, he was afraid to talk to girls and was often terrorized by
tough little white boys.

His father, a police officer, was a Julliard-schooled musician who passed on his
love for jazz and his black rage. His protective mother was right there that day
in the white Catholic school's auditorium, hanging decorations for a parents
association dance.

After the press conference was over and most everyone had gone, Alcindor came
into the coach's office to chat with a few stragglers. He had a warm smile, he
seemed very open. When he said he was sports editor of the school newspaper, he
won our hearts. Yes, he was thinking of becoming our colleague. I advised him to
take as many TV courses as he could; sports broadcasting was the future, I said
grandly. He thanked me before he had to leave for a Russian history class.

The next Alcindor press conference I attended was in 1968. He was a college
junior, and he had turned out to be even better than people expected. U.C.L.A.
(known as the University of California at Lew Alcindor) had lost only one game
in which he played (he had double vision from an injury) and dunking had been
outlawed to try to stop him. He began to construct the sky hook. Again, he was
generally kept from the press by his coach; his natural shyness and his
willingness to turn himself over to an authority figure made it easy. He
appeared aloof, disdainful. An adversarial relationship with the media
developed, and his principled refusal, during the Vietnam War and the civil
rights struggle, to play on the United States Olympic team, was never properly
discussed.

By now, his seriousness seemed to have become hard-edged, and the sweetness had
become a kind of distance. Someone asked if he was still interested in sports
journalism. He surveyed the news pack very coldly, waited several impolite
beats, and said: "I'm majoring in history now. I'm no longer interested in
journalism."

Perhaps because he played with such containment, because he refused to share his
emotions (he was never one of the promiscuous crowd-pleasers that Harry Edwards
calls "The Grinners"), he never became a beloved of the crowd. Or perhaps he was
just too tall. Seven-four sounds right. He was far away. When he embraced Islam
and changed his name, he again came under the spell of an older male teacher;
that was another relationship from which he had to grow out. But he never gave
less than his best on the court, or whenever he made a commitment. His 1983
autobiography, "Giant Steps," with Peter Knobler, was one of the best, and most
open, of the superstar memoirs.

The year it came out, I reminded him of his first press conference, and of my
advice; I was working for TV myself at the time. He seemed more relaxed than I
had ever seen him. He was sitting on the diving board of his Bel Air pool, the
only structure remaining after a fire had gutted his home and destroyed all the
books and records he had begun collecting as an only child who liked to sit by
himself in his room. He thought the fire might be a beginning.

"I realized they were just things; I didn't need them for a meaningful life," he
said. And then that old sweet seriousness came back as he said: "And then people
began giving me records after games, leaving records at the hotel. I didn't know
that these people were my friends. I was that far removed from everybody."

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar never became a beloved of the crowd but he
never gave it less than his best. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Day Without Fanfare Is Still a Day for Remembrance

BYLINE: By KAREN DEMASTERS

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 8;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 462 words

DATELINE: HOLMDEL


The dignitaries have gone. No bands play, no speeches are delivered. It is a
simple weekday. But still they come, the survivors and the mourners, to touch,
to stare. Alone with their thoughts, the visitors to New Jersey's Vietnam
Veterans' Memorial seek quiet communion with the casualties of a war whose
political ambiguity once cast a dark shadow over their service.

Pat Hogan, of Old Bridge, has pledged to visit the site every day for a year,
starting at the official dedication last Sunday. He comes, he says, to mourn his
brother, Bill, who survived Army service in Vietnam only to die much later with
his memories.

Pat Hogan says he is trying to reconcile Bill's death with the greeting he
encountered 25 years ago at John F. Kennedy International Airport when he
stepped off the plane from Vietnam: thrown beer cans and shouts of "baby
killer."

Last year, at the age of 40, Bill Hogan, an Irvington Police Officer, killed
himself. Pat swears it was the war in Southeast Asia that provoked his brother's
suicide.

"It seems like you can't get over it," said Pat Hogan, 44, as he sat on a
hilltop overlooking the Garden State Arts Center that provides the setting for
the memorial, a circle of 366 black granite slabs, one for each day of the year.
The names of the 1,547 soldiers from New Jersey who died -- from the first, on
Aug. 31, 1960, to the last, on Jan. 24, 1975 -- are etched on the slabs. Only
nine panels are empty, days on which no one from New Jersey was killed. In all,
78,000 New Jerseyans served there.

The Memorial Foundation, which oversaw the $3.7 million project, is still
working on compiling the histories of each of the people honored on the wall and
a $3.8 million education center is under construction. The site will be open 24
hours a day every day and a system will be devised so names on the wall can be
easily located.

Ronald Wardell, 46, now a resident of Tuckerton, took a day off from Point
Pleasant High School in 1966 to go to the funeral of a friend, Pfc. Clifford A.
McKennan, who was killed in action at the age of 20 and whose name is now on the
wall. Two years later, Mr. Wardell was Sgt. Wardell, completing a one-year tour
of duty.

"One day I was in Vietnam with a gun in my hand and 44 hours later I was back in
the United States," Mr. Wardell said. "I was 21 years old. They were our last
friends."

Your last true friends? he was asked. "Other than my wife, yes," he said. "A lot
of us felt that way."
 Some criticized the memorial because it is larger than the one in Washington,
and because it omitted Korean War veterans. But most seemed to find a touch of
peace.

"I know people say it was a senseless war," said Mary Clemens of Lacey Township,
"but I'm pround of them all."   KAREN DEMASTERS

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the Vietnam War memorial in Holmdel, black granite slabs, one
for each day of the year, bear the names of New Jersey's 1,547 war dead. (Norman
Y. Lono for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENCOUNTERS;
Getting to Know Mr. Lincoln

BYLINE: By BEVERLY LOWRY;   Beverly Lowry's most recent novel is "The Track of
Real Desires" (Knopf).

SECTION: Section 6;  Part 2;  Page 65;  Column 1;  Sophisticated Traveler
Magazine

LENGTH: 1830 words


In September, I moved to Washington to take up a teaching job at George
Washington University. I was provided housing in a brownstone the college owns
in a once-swampy area of town called Foggy Bottom. From my house, the White
House was about five blocks east, the Kennedy Center about the same distance in
the other direction. I found my way around Foggy Bottom quickly enough. Like
that of many cities, the history of Washington is about water. There's always
too much or too little. Less bossy than it used to be, the Potomac River now
cradles Foggy Bottom. Parkland along the riverbank provides ample walking paths,
north and south and across the river into Virginia. I walked and walked, to
Cleveland Park, to Georgetown.

But the direction I headed most often was straight south down the street I lived
on, past the small park where 10 to 20 homeless men lived and on warm nights
danced to a whammed-out beat on metal containers, past the huge, faceless State
Department building, past one of the many kiosks selling three-for-$10 T-shirts
and another one selling egg rolls, hot smokies and pretzels, across Constitution
Avenue, to the Mall.

Everything is there: museums, a small lake, the Capitol, the Washington
Monument, the Jefferson and Lincoln Memorials, not to mention people from all
over the world. I went there all the time, to watch the people or go to a
museum, often to see only one exhibit, or even one painting or statue. There was
one funerary statue in the Museum of African Art I grew particularly attached
to. And afterwards I would come back home feeling lively and nurtured and
accompanied -- by the art I had seen, the observations from the walk, the
people, the water, the wide long stretches of green. Because no building can be
taller than the Capitol, there is a lot of sky in Washington, which I found
comforting.

One night early in the fall semester I decided to go for a short run after
class. But on my way home, I ran into a colleague and so by the time I had laced
up my shoes and hit 21st Street, it was past 7:30 and dark.

I took the most lighted route, turning on Virginia Avenue toward the Washington
monument. The monument's up on a rise, and well lighted. When I got to 19th
Street, I could see a number of people still wandering around its base.

I had my Walkman on, rock music pounding into my ears. When I got to
Constitution, there was still a rosy glow in the sky but the light was failing
fast. I would, I told myself, start straight back home as soon as I got to the
Monument, but once I did, and looked west down the reflecting pool toward the
river, I stopped dead in my tracks.

After the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, it took more than fifty years of hot
dispute before a decision was made about what kind of memorial should be built
in his honor, and where it should go. In the late 1800's, Tiber Creek met the
Potomac on what would become Constitution Avenue. The water flowed all the way
to the White House, often flooding Pennsylvania Avenue. The unfinished
Washington Monument was an unsightly stump; the west end of the mall,
riverbottom; the area around it, malarial marshes.

All kinds of suggestions were made: a triumphal arch, a grand memorial to the
soldiers and statesmen of the Civil War. The emerging automobile industry
favored a memorial highway from Washington to Gettysburg. Railwaymen wanted a
statue at Union Station. Finally, in 1911, the classic design of architect Henry
Bacon was chosen. By then, Tiber Creek had been covered over, the swamps dredged
and filled, the land reclaimed. The west end of the mall was still
mosquito-ridden and jungly but Bacon's supporters won the day and Congress voted
to situate the memorial on a spot some three thousand yards down the mall from
the Washington Monument, on an axis that went from the Capitol across the river
to the Arlington Cemetery, and the house which until the Civil War had been the
home of Robert E. Lee.

The sun sets behind the Lincoln Memorial, at an angle from its southernmost
corner. That night it had already gone down, but that time of year sunset
blessedly lasts for what seems like hours, and the sky was wildly ablaze,
framing the memorial in a pulsating glow of deep reds, wild pinks and hot golds
as lush and beautiful and vulgar as a cheap chiffon scarf.

I switched off my Walkman and stood there gawking, saying, "Look. Look at that,"
out loud and to nobody at all. The lights inside the memorial had gone on.
There's a moment when, after that happens, the sky suddenly gets dark enough
that the statue of Lincoln inside the memorial slowly makes a ghostly appearance
from between the columns. From where I stood, I saw it happen. Like a picture
coming into focus, gradually he was there, seated and in deep contemplation.
With the sky on fire behind him, it was as if the whole thing had been staged, a
drama of night and time, history and splendor. Beyond the memorial, the Memorial
Bridge with its spotty sparkling lights pointed the way across the Potomac. In
the reflecting pool, some geese honked a raucous chant, flapped their wings and
took off. An airplane from National Airport flew in a diagonal line across the
memorial, heading northeast.

I started for home. Beyond the statue of Jose de San Martin, there was a stretch
of dark sidewalk to get through and -- having read all the crime reports before
arriving -- I vowed if I made it home safely that night, never to go out that
late again. But I wasn't sorry I had taken the risk. And afterwards I began
going to the mall more often and for a more specific reason than for the people,
the art or the sky. I went, as I said to myself in the way people alone speak
aloud to themselves all the time, "to visit Abe."

Sometimes on a cool clear morning I would simply get up and go down there. The
Wall, as the memorial to the veterans of the Vietnam War is called, is located
just north of the Lincoln Memorial, and so I had to pass it on my way, and then
the kiosks manned by Warriors, Inc., and Friends of the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial. No matter how early I got there, the kiosks were open, selling
T-shirts and POW and MIA bracelets. I would move on past them, and up the 58
steps to the memorial, where I paid Mr. Lincoln my respects then came back home
and made coffee, ready for the day.

I quickly began to develop a relationship with Abraham Lincoln. I read a couple
of biographies, I went to Ford's Theater where he was shot, and the house across
the street, where he died. I stared at pictures of him for long minutes at a
time. There was nothing about his life I did not find moving, and significant.
And I began to depend on his presence. In my life as a visitor, Abraham Lincoln
became a constant.

One day, standing on the top step leading to the reflecting pool, I heard this
conversation from a group of boys in private-school jackets and ties:

"Which one is that?" He pointed.

"Lincoln I think. You taking a picture?"

"No, man. I only took Jefferson because Forrest Gump went there." And they moved
on.

I have taken 10 or 12 photos of strangers who wanted a picture to take home, of
themselves next to Lincoln. I would look in the lens and they would be standing
there, those overhanging marble-booted toes high above them. they wouldn't do
anything, not even smile, just stand there.

Not wanting to become jaded, I didn't always go up into the memorial itself.
Sometimes I only walked past, looked to see who was around, nodded at the
statue, and went on. About once a month however I allowed myself the pleasure. I
devised a ceremony. I was strict. I did it the same way every time.

First I read the bronze plaque at the foot of the steps, explaining that there
are 36 columns in the memorial, symbolizing the 36 states that were a part of
the Union during Lincoln's Presidency, all of which are named on the frieze
above the columns. And then I would go up the steps, reading the names of the
states, noting that states from both the North and South are on the front
facade: Massachusetts, Virginia, New York, Georgia.

Henry Bacon's design was of an American version of a Greek Doric temple turned
sideways, so that the long side became the front facade. The inner room,
therefore, is comparatively shallow, and so when you walk inside the statue
looks even bigger than it actually is, it's that close and in your face. Once I
got past the columns, I stopped.

For the most part, visits to graves or memorial sites are a disappointment. You
expect something to be there, to give you a sign, that all the marble and
greenskeeping and landscaping mean something; that some version of the dead
person is still around. And mostly nothing is there except trees, grass, the
stone. In the Lincoln Memorial, however, I could swear some kind of magic has
been accomplished. Henry Bacon's method of working was said to have been one of
"ceaseless meditation." In the memorial, the presence of Lincoln seems to be all
over the place.

I took my time looking up. He's up there, 11 feet of pedestal, 19 of statue. I
concentrated first on his hands, the long fingers of the right one articulately,
even delicately tensed as if about to make a gesture; the left one clenched in a
loose, determined fist. After the hands I took in the huge booted feet and long
legs, the broad shoulders and then finally -- holding off, to extend the moment
-- I made my way to his magnificent face, those eyes. He is looking slightly
down but mostly out, as if absorbed in his own thoughts yet knowing he must not
sink too far or grow too introspective; there is a country to think of, and all
those dead young men.

Beyond the top of his head, the inscription carved in the marble panel always
fairly took my breath away: "In this temple, as in the hearts of the people for
whom he saved the Union, the memory of Abraham Lincoln is enshrined forever." A
newspaperman wrote those words, one Royal Cortissoz, then arts editor of the New
York Herald Tribune. I would move from one side of the statue to another, taking
it in from all angles. Aided by carefully orchestrated artificial lighting,
sunlight falls softly through skylights in the ceiling, and bounces off the
reflecting pool and on a clear day fills the memorial.

On either side of the statue are the marble tablets on which are carved, on one
side, the amazing Gettysburg Address and on the other, the even more moving and
eloquent Second Inaugural Address. I made a point to read them, word by word,
every time I went.

Hired to teach classes in the personal essay, I suggested to my classes that
when feeling confused about the form, they take a walk to the memorial and read
those speeches. There they would find out the difference between certainty and
smugness, between modesty and ambivalence.

I read those speeches many times. And every time I did I felt moved and grounded
again, as an American and as a writer. And afterward I would go down the steps
feeling nourished and clean.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I concentrated first on his hands, the left one clenched in a
loose, determined fist." (Lizzie Himmel for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Revelations, Secrets, Gossip and Lies: Sifting Warily Through the Soviet
Archives

BYLINE: By Steven Merritt Miner;   Steven Merritt Miner is an associate
professor of history at Ohio University and the author of "Between Churchill and
Stalin: The Soviet Union, Great Britain, and the Origins of the Grand Alliance."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4059 words


WITH the opening of the Russian archives there has come a flood of new works
purporting to reveal the hidden truths of the former Soviet Union -- and a flood
of new questions as well. What is one to make of these books? How can the
veracity of the fresh, sometimes contradictory, information be tested? Has
access to long-hidden records finally produced a consensus about Soviet reality?

Throughout most of this century, the Soviet Union has provided the equivalent of
a political Rorschach test. Looking at the Soviet ink blot, observers saw vastly
different images, sometimes a deeply evil, aggressive and expansionist
totalitarian state, blood kin to Nazi Germany, sometimes an alternative society,
flawed perhaps, but nonetheless a genuinely socialist state prevented from
realizing its "progressive" egalitarian mission in large part by Western,
especially American, hostility. Scanning the scholarly literature on the Soviet
Union, one can find prominent academics arguing either of these points of view,
along with all the others in between.

Basically, two broad trends have warred with one another in Soviet
historiography (the stakes behind the quarrel always being greater than the mere
fate of Soviet history itself). On one side were the "traditionalists," so
called by their critics. These critics, in turn, grabbed the romantic mantle of
rebels-against-orthodoxy by styling themselves "revisionists."

The traditional school, represented by scholars like Leonard Schapiro and Walter
Laqueur, maintained that the Soviet experiment, as it used to be called, was
flawed from the outset. In this reading, Lenin's political vision was
totalitarian, and any attempt to create a society based on his coercive
utopianism was likely to lead logically to Stalin's violent terror state, or to
some variant of Stalinism.  It followed that there could be no "good" Leninism;
regimes patterned on the Soviet example were destined for internal tyranny and
external expansion.  America's conduct of the cold war was thus justified, and
Leninist revolutions in such distant lands as Cuba and Vietnam were suspect.
Unsurprisingly, traditionalists claim that the Soviet Union's collapse
vindicates their views.

Revisionists, who dominated the historiography of the Soviet Union during the
past decade, are not a homogeneous group. Revisionism is more an attitude than a
coherent school of thought. Some, among them Alexander Rabinowitch and Stephen
Cohen, believe that early Bolshevism held great promise; it was democratic and
genuinely socialist, and was corrupted only later by civil war, foreign
hostility, Stalin's malignancy and the dead hand of Russian history. More
extreme revisionists, like Jerry Hough, have claimed that even under Stalin the
Soviet Union was neither totalitarian nor as lethal as is generally believed.
Similarly, historians like Robert W. Thurston point to the Soviet Union's
supposed achievements in "education, upward social mobility, increased
availability of medical care, urbanization," and doubt whether mass terror was
"the key to Soviet life at any time, with the possible exception of
collectivization" of Soviet agriculture. In this reading, even the political
purges of the late 1930's did not terrorize society at large, since the "Soviet
people believed widely in the regime and its hunt for enemies."

Revisionism was born in the wake of the Vietnam era, the offspring of
disillusionment with American foreign policy and a general questioning of
Western values. To traditionalists, the more extreme revisionist arguments
smacked of apologetics for Stalin's mass killing; no number of new steel mills
and cement plants could excuse his slaughter any more than Auschwitz could be
pardoned because Hitler built the Autobahn. The revisionists, by contrast,
regarded traditionalists as cold warriors practicing politicized scholarship, an
accusation that could as easily be leveled at them.

Given this seismic rift in Soviet historiography, great hopes greeted the
opening of the Soviet archives. As more than one historian believed, it would
finally prove who was right. Judged by the scale of the hopes, however, the
opening of the archives has proved disappointing. Administrative chaos,
incomplete records and the general difficulty of working in Russia have all
conspired to complicate serious research.

The first problem is the nature of the archives themselves. Records are
scattered in a number of different repositories and, following a brief two-year
honeymoon after 1991, access has become more restricted. Indexes of documents
and other aids are few and inadequate, while vast troves of the most sensitive
materials remain off-limits.

Nobody can tell what documents have been removed, either by political figures
eager to protect reputations, or by people wanting to sell especially valuable
material to foreign scholars and television journalists. I once received a file
on the British Communist Party that was supposed to contain more than 90 pages.
In fact, only three pages were actually in the folder. Where the remainder had
gone was anybody's guess.

In most Western archives, files on a particular policy will contain documents
from various levels of Government. In the Soviet Central Committee archives,
however, files often contain only the committee's records; it is possible to
read hundreds of pages on a given policy debate without learning what action the
Politburo finally took. The reason may be careless storage or obsessive Soviet
secrecy. Some decisions were regarded as so secret that either orders were
issued orally, with no record kept, or the relevant document was withdrawn to a
more secure (and still closed) archive.

EVEN if all the records suddenly became available, there is still the peculiar
nature of the subject itself. As one reads through the endless Soviet paper
trail, it is easy to be lulled into thinking that the Soviet state was a
bureaucracy much like any other.  The researcher must always remember, however,
that especially during the Stalin years prudent Soviet bureaucrats were
exceedingly careful about what they committed to paper. A misstep could land the
unwary in the gulag.

Despite these formidable obstacles, the new Soviet evidence has already altered
the tone and direction of the historical debate. Although the traditionalists
cannot claim total vindication, the revelations have not as a rule been kind to
the revisionist enterprise.

The first icon to fall is Lenin himself. For those who wished to rescue
something from the Soviet wreck, it was necessary to draw a sharp line between
the founder of the Communist regime and his murderous successor, Stalin. Lenin,
it was argued, used force and even terror, but he did so under the stress of
civil war and foreign intervention. Once the Bolshevik state was secure, the
argument continued, Lenin eased up on political repression and modified his more
ideologically driven policies.

In a two-volume history of the Russian Revolution, written on a grand scale, the
Harvard historian Richard Pipes has sought to place the blame for the evils of
the Stalinist regime squarely on the shoulders of Lenin and his concept of the
one-party state. Mr. Pipes is a major figure among the traditionalists, and
although the first volume of his history, "The Russian Revolution," appeared
before the opening of the Soviet archives, the second volume, "Russia Under the
Bolshevik Regime," is, if anything, even more hard-hitting. In Mr. Pipes's view,
not only is Lenin the progenitor of modern revolutionary violence and radical,
bloody social change, but he also gave the world a blueprint for the
ideology-based terror state, which other monsters of our century, like Hitler,
would use to such deadly effect. Mr. Pipes's well-documented and sharply
reasoned account has yet to produce a convincing rebuttal.

IN a formidable if uneven book, "Lenin: A New Biography," the prominent Russian
historian Dmitri Volkogonov has followed Mr. Pipes's lead. Mr. Volkogonov, once
a colonel general in the Soviet Army and a loyal Leninist, gradually lost his
faith as he gained access to classified records. He wrote the first critical
biography of Stalin to be published in Russia. Enjoying access to records denied
to less well-connected scholars, Mr. Volkogonov has produced in his study of
Lenin less a biography than an indictment. He commits the biographical sin of
painting his subject in uniformly dark colors, thus failing to explain
adequately how such a flawed figure as Lenin could ever command the support and
respect of so many people. Still, the book is a milestone; not since Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn's magisterial "Gulag Archipelago" has such a well-known Russian
argued so persuasively that Lenin himself created and used all the tools that
Stalin would employ during his reign of terror.

The sheer scope of that terror has overshadowed other post-Soviet revelations.
Newly unearthed mass graves salted around the former Soviet Union contain more
bodies of Stalin's victims than the total estimates for victims advanced by
certain revisionist historians. In "Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet
Communist Party Reconsidered, 1933-1938," J. Arch Getty argued that the purges
were less the product of Nazi-like planned murder from above than of
bureaucratic chaos, inefficiency and personal rivalries -- and that they were
largely independent of Stalin's will. Elsewhere, Mr. Getty has even suggested
that, just as Stalin's intelligence services misinformed him about Hitler's
intentions before the Nazi invasion of 1941, so too his subordinates may have
misinformed him about the number of his victims.

But a chilling set of publications appearing in 1991 in the Russian journal
Kommunist by the historian N. F. Bugai shows that Stalin was indeed often very
well informed about his underlings' actions. Mr. Bugai printed a collection of
messages from Lavrenti Beria, the chief of the secret police, dating from the
end of World War II that detailed the deportation, on Stalin's orders, of
non-Russian ethnic groups suspected of disloyalty, notably the Chechens. Beria's
reports read as though they could have come from the hand of Adolf Eichmann. He
dutifully informs his boss how many cattle cars were required, how many men,
women and children were deported, how many died en route and how many police
troops were needed for the process.

Mr. Bugai is not alone in looking anew at Stalin's crimes. Robert Conquest has
updated his fine history, "The Great Terror," incorporating much new supportive
information. Among the revelations are documents emanating from Moscow to
provincial cities and setting numerical quotas for arrests of supposed "wreckers
and spies." And in "Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy," Mr. Volkogonov provides an
account of Stalin and his foreign minister V. M. Molotov signing the death
warrant of 3,167 people one night in December 1938. Certainly Stalin was not
responsible for every sparrow that fell during his rule. But it is no more
possible to claim that he misunderstood the scope of his terror than it would be
to assert that the death camps sprang up in Hitler's Reich unbeknownst to the
Fuhrer.

Facts do work their magic, even on strongly held views. Significantly, a recent
collection of essays by revisionist authors, "Stalinist Terror: New
Perspectives," edited by J. Arch Getty and Roberta Manning, both renounces the
revisionist label and explicitly affirms Stalin's role in the terror, though
asserting that a great many nasty things happened outside his purview. To be
sure, two of the essays attempt to prove that the number of Stalinist victims is
much lower than the 20 million figure advanced by Mr. Conquest, as well as by
the former Soviet dissident Marxist Roy Medvedev. The essayists claim instead
that between 4 million and 11 million people died under Stalin. The documentary
record is almost certainly too fragmentary ever to settle this quarrel to
everyone's satisfaction, but the opening of the archives has visibly shifted the
center of the debate.

Sheila Fitzpatrick, one of the founders of revisionism, has likewise changed
with the times, but in her case the result has been a valuable work, "Stalin's
Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the Russian Village After
Collectivization." She initially became known for arguing that the radicalism of
Stalin's first five-year plan was as much a response to pressures for radical
change "from below" as it was the brainchild of Communist hierarchs. In her most
recent work Ms. Fitzpatrick sounds at times almost like her old adversaries. She
documents the murderous nature of collectivization in the 1930's, shows how the
peasantry was dispirited by Stalin's "second enserfment" and outlines the dire
effects of the Communist assault on the Russian church. At the same time, she
indicates how Russian peasants managed passively to resist governmental
dictates. Though she argues, unpersuasively, that peasant resistance to state
demands was somehow "negotiation" -- it could more usefully be compared to the
foot-dragging of slaves -- she nonetheless demonstrates how revisionist concerns
with grass-roots social conditions can enlighten our understanding of common
Russian lives. Perhaps her thought-provoking book is the first sign of an
emerging historical synthesis.

In the realm of foreign affairs and espionage, quality has been less uniform.
The best work in this field to date is "Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union
and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956," an excellent study of the Soviet atomic program
and postwar Soviet diplomacy by the political scientist David Holloway. It is
now clear that the first Soviet atom bomb resulted from Moscow's successful
penetration of the Manhattan Project. Mr. Holloway also argues effectively that,
with Stalin in control, American diplomacy had few options: "All attempts to
imagine alternative courses of postwar international relations run up against
Stalin himself. . . . His malevolent and suspicious personality pervades the
history of these years."

Soviet documents dating from the Brezhnev years uncovered by Mr. Holloway and
Kathryn Weathersby, a historian at Florida State University, shed new light on
the origins of the Korean War. From these records, published in the Bulletin of
the Cold War International History Project, it is clear that the North Korean
leader Kim Il Sung did not invade the south until Soviet weapons deliveries were
complete and Stalin gave his assent. Even so, a dispute that followed the
publication of this material shows how documents seldom solve historical
questions; instead they shift the debate into new lines. In an accompanying
commentary, Ms. Weathersby claimed that the initiative for the attack came not
from Stalin but from Kim. Adam B. Ulam, the foremost historian of Soviet
diplomacy, countered with an analogy: "In an athletic event, a race is not
initiated by the runners crouching down. The race is initiated by the starter
shouting 'go.' That is what Stalin did."

Readers interested in keeping up with the new information coming out of Russia
have many opportunities. Yale University Press has started publishing a series
of volumes based on documents from the Soviet archives (see page 21). But
perhaps the single best source is the Bulletin of the Cold War International
History Project, published by the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington. Readers
can find in this excellent publication not only the latest revelations but also
sober discussion of various interpretations.

Regarding the memoir literature pouring out of Russia, the reader should tread
warily, especially around those books claiming to reveal the K.G.B. from the
inside. A good example of the genre is "The First Directorate: My 32 Years in
Intelligence and Espionage Against the West," the latest book by Gen. Oleg
Kalugin, a former high-ranking K.G.B. spook who gained international attention
by leaving his high post before the fall of Communism (but after his career had
been ruined by political intrigue). His book, written with the journalist Fen
Montaigne, contains colorful anecdotes about cold war relics like Kim Philby and
the odd useful insight about Soviet life, but it offers little new on espionage.
A career spent spying has instilled reticence; Mr. Kalugin says nothing, for
instance, about Aldrich Ames.

The most notorious spy memoir to appear recently is "Special Tasks: The Memoirs
of an Unwanted Witness -- A Soviet Spymaster," by Pavel Sudoplatov and Anatoly
Sudoplatov, written with Jerrold L. Schecter and Leona P. Schecter. An old
Stalinist hit man, Pavel Sudoplatov reveals useful things about the murder of
Trotsky and other "enemies of the people." But he succumbs to the memoirist's
disease, placing himself at the center of all important events.  His contention
that most of the Manhattan Project scientists leaked information to the Soviets
contains factual errors and unproven innuendo; often, it is little more than
gossip. Without a specialist's knowledge of Soviet history, the reader of such
"revelations" is at a loss to know what to believe and what not to believe.
Caution is advised.

Not all Soviet memoirs are so flawed, however.  One that received less attention
than it merited was the reminiscences of Molotov, entitled "Molotov Remembers.
Inside Kremlin Politics: Conversations With Felix Chuev," edited by the
historian Albert Resis. Although not easy to use, since it's a compilation of
random observations by the man during the last decade of his long life, it
nevertheless offers real insight into top-level Stalinist politics. Molotov
justifies the purges and repressions just as an old Nazi might excuse the death
camps. He also reinforces the view that Soviet policy was highly ideological,
brutal and acquisitive. "My task as minister of foreign affairs was to expand
the borders of the Fatherland," he says at the outset ("as much as possible,"
the Russian, but not the English, version adds). "And it seems that Stalin and I
coped with this task quite well," Molotov continues.

It should be clear by now that post-Soviet revelations will not bring an end to
historical debate. Fundamental philosophical differences over human nature,
international morality and the viability of socialism run too deep for a grand
new consensus to emerge.  Careers and reputations are also on the line.

Nonetheless, the debate has been pushed into several new directions. On the cold
war, it would now seem impossible to argue that Stalin acted from purely
defensive motives, or that his methods were anything but brutal and often based
on ignorance of the outside world. Ideology as the lens through which the Soviet
leaders viewed the world is once again central, after having been played down by
scholars for two decades. (Some historians will no doubt argue, however, that we
now know the Soviet Union suffered much greater damage in the war than
previously believed, and so Soviet strength was limited, no matter how malign
Stalin's intentions may have been.)

Likewise, in Soviet domestic history, we may never know how many millions of
Soviet citizens died in the gulag or from Stalin's collectivization, but even if
more precise figures do become available, evaluations of this enormous tragedy
will vary endlessly. On the one hand, Robert Conquest compares the Ukraine
during collectivization to one vast Bergen-Belsen; on the other, Chris Ward, in
"Stalin's Russia," dismisses the event as just another atrocity of a bloody
Western civilization. "Stalin's agrarian revolution," he writes, "is noteworthy
only for the scale and speed of its implementation, and the compression of the
misery involved into an extraordinarily short time span."

No amount of new evidence can ever bridge such an enormous gap in values and
human sympathy. People will forever interpret the Soviet inkblot by their own
standards.



THE KREMLIN CONNECTION

Yale University Press has begun a series entitled "Annals of Communism" that
combines newly released Soviet archival materials with texts and annotations by
Russian and American scholars. The first two books in the series have now
appeared and they are certain to cause some rethinking.

THE SECRET WORLD OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM ($25), put together by Harvey Klehr, John
Earl Haynes and Fridrikh Igor evich Firsov, with translations by Timothy D.
Sergay, weighs in heavily on one side of a longstanding debate. Mr. Klehr, a
leading historian of American Communism, has often argued that the party was not
like other political parties, nor was it in the mainstream of American
radicalism. Mr. Klehr's critics have countered that the conspiratorial nature of
the party has been vastly overstated; it did not function as a branch of the
Soviet espionage apparatus, and rank-and-file members chiefly sought social
justice. Above all else, they claim that the party grew to its peak during the
1930's because it articulated an appealing message in the face of capitalist
failure, not because it was financed by Moscow.

The documents in this collection decisively undercut most of these arguments.
They reveal an organization obsessed with covert tactics like safe houses and
contacts with Soviet intelligence. With these materials and others released by
Boris Yeltsin, it is now indisputable that American Communists continued to
receive heavy Kremlin funding in all the years from Lenin through Gorbachev. The
documents show that figures like John Reed and Armand Hammer acted as Soviet
couriers, notwithstanding Hammer's lifelong denials.

Even during World War II, when Washington and Moscow were allies, American
Communists like Morris Cohen, an associate of the Rosenbergs, relayed atomic
secrets to the Kremlin. Others leaked diplomatic information or infiltrated
governmental organizations at Moscow's behest. Furthermore, acting on direct
orders from Soviet intelligence, American Communist leaders in the first months
of the war ceased cooperating with the O.S.S., the forerunner of the C.I.A., for
fear of infiltration by the American and British intelligence services. Clearly,
in Stalin's reckoning, the war against Hitler had to be balanced against the
need to preserve intelligence assets for the postwar struggle.

Perhaps most controversially, the editors write that Soviet records unearthed to
date support the testimony of Whittaker Chambers and others that the American
Communist Party was engaged in underground conspiracies against the American
Government. These documents suggest that Communists who continued to claim
otherwise were either willfully naive or, more likely, dishonest.

STALIN'S LETTERS TO MOLOTOV, 1925-1936 ($25), edited by Lars T. Lih, Oleg V.
Naumov and Oleg V. Khlevniuk, with translations by Catherine A. Fitzpatrick and
a foreword by Robert C. Tucker, is equally fascinating. There are only 86
letters, since Molotov himself selected which documents to donate to the
archives. Thus, it is impossible to say whether he destroyed the more unsavory
correspondence, though suspicions are heightened by the fact that there are no
letters from particularly crucial or lethal years, like 1928 and 1937.

Nonetheless, these documents provide the best insight yet into the workings of
Stalin's political mind; they also demonstrate his early concern with foreign
affairs, hitherto largely unknown. Writing of negotiations with the British in
1929, Stalin displayed his crude, ideological diplomatic reasoning: "Remember we
are waging a struggle (negotiation with enemies is also struggle), not with
England alone, but with the whole capitalist world." The British Government
"wants to show the whole capitalist world that it can take more from us (with
the help of 'gentle' methods) than Mussolini. . . . We really would be worthless
if we couldn't manage to reply to these arrogant bastards briefly and to the
point: 'You won't get a . . . thing from us.' "

Unfortunately, the editors mar this otherwise excellent collection, and their
own sometimes useful insights, with silly observations, like one about Stalin's
"sincerity and his leadership skills." Rather than revealing a great leader,
these letters portray a deceitful man gripped by a dark view of humanity and of
the world as a pit of unremitting, mortal struggle.
   STEVEN MERRITT MINER

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Ready to Seek Worldwide Ban on Nuclear Arms Tests

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words


With the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons now a permanent fixture
in international relations, the Clinton Administration is ready to press to
complete a worldwide ban on atomic testing by the end of next year, the
President's chief arms control expert says.

When 174 nations agreed by consensus on Thursday to make the Treaty on the
Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons permanent, they also adopted a statement
committing them to complete a test-ban accord and to take other steps toward
eliminating nuclear arms.

In an interview on Friday, as the month-long conference on nuclear issues ended,
Thomas Graham Jr., Special Representative of the President for Arms Control
Nonproliferation and Disarmament, outlined the issues on which American debate
on disarmament are likely to be focused in the years ahead.

He noted that the agreement on the test-ban accord and other steps, part of the
bargain with developing nations for approval of the treaty extension, put
reluctant nuclear powers on record as supporting further steps to limit nuclear
arms. That increases the Administration's confidence that these other steps can
be accomplished, he said.

Discussing the potential for a ban on nuclear weapons testing, he said: "This
has been probably the central nuclear-arms control objective since the late
1950's, and now we have all the nuclear-weapon states -- and of course everyone
else -- committed to achieving this by 1996."

He said that the comprehensive test-ban treaty, which has been the subject of
off-and-on-again talks in Geneva, is the United States' first priority. The
United States has had a moratorium on testing since July 1993.

"After that -- and I don't mean chronologically, but in order of priority -- we
need to proceed promptly to the negotiation of a fissionable material cutoff,"
he said, referring to aprovision of the statement adopted Thursday for a ban on
production of bomb-grade plutonium and highly enriched uranium necessary to the
building of nuclear bombs.

He said the talks would be difficult "because there are a lot of conflicting
interests involved." Some nations with nuclear weapons have been reluctant to
give up the option.

The ban on producing these materials, which would cover only military stocks,
would not address the rapidly growing stocks of weapons-grade materials being
produced as byproducts of spent fuel from nuclear energy reactors, Paul
Leventhal of the Nuclear Control Institute, an independent research organization
in Washington, said in a recent interview.

Mr. Leventhal said that by 1990, the 650 metric tons of plutonium that had been
produced in civilian installations was almost three times the total military
inventories in the five nations that have acknowledged that they have nuclear
weapons -- the United States, Britain, China, France and Russia. By 2010,
civilian plutonium stocks could total 2,100 metric tons, about eight times the
military stocks, Mr. Leventhal said.

He also said he believes that bomb-grade material is more likely to fall into
terrorist hands from civilian rather than military sources.

"I cannot deny this is a serious issue," Mr. Graham said. But he said that the
countries where this material is still being produced in any quantity --
Britain, France, Japan and Russia -- are in his view "completely dedicated" to
nonproliferation. Only India, which now produces about 4 percent of the world's
plutonium, is outside the treaty.

Mr. Graham also placed ratification of the second strategic arms treaty with
Russia high on his priority list. The treaty, known as Start II, is awaiting
action in the Senate and in the Russian Parliament. He is more optimistic than
other arms control experts that Russia will approve the treaty, which seemed in
danger of being held up by nationalists afraid of losing ground to the United
States. The treaty would cut the number of warheads on long-range missiles,
submarines and heavy bombers in each country to between 3,000 and 3,500 a
reduction of about two-thirds.

That level does not satisfy campaigners for more rapid or complete disarmament,
among them Daniel Ellsberg, who fasted throughout the four-week conference here
to urge sharper cuts.

Mr. Ellsberg, who now directs the Washington-based Manhattan Project II, a
disarmament program supported by the Physicians for Social Responsibility, is
known best for leaking the Pentagon Papers in 1971, which dealt a fatal blow to
war policy in Vietnam. He says that the United States' determination to keep
atomic weapons, even in reduced numbers, makes Washington guilty of "nuclear
terrorism."

Mr. Graham, who has worked on arms control for two decades, said that the
Administration "is committed to the ultimate goal of a nuclear-free world."

"But to make empty promises that have no short-term possibility of being
fulfilled does not make a contribution to improving security and strengthening
arms control," he said.

He said that as the country proceeds toward nuclear disarmament, "We have to be
very, very careful."

"If Somalia were to acquire 20 nuclear weapons, what are you going to do about
that?" he said.

In a Republican-led Congress and in research organizations that urge a more
cautious position on arms control, there are concerns that the United States may
be giving away too much, not too little.

Baker Spring, a senior defense analyst at The Heritage Foundation in Washington,
said in an interview on Friday that he suspected that the American delegation at
the conference might have made some unwritten commitments on disarmament to gain
consensus from previously "recalcitrant" developing nations.

"The weakening of the U.S. nuclear deterrent will spur rogue regimes like North
Korea to acquire nuclear weapons," he wrote in a recent position paper.

He is also wary of rushing into a comprehensive test ban treaty and predicted
that even a more liberal Congress would have trouble ratifying a sweeping test
ban agreement.

Mr. Graham, while savoring the success of winning a decision to extend the
treaty indefinitely, recognizes the pressures from the right. In fact, he said
he tastes only a bittersweet victory because the United States Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, which did most of the work on the conference that just
ended, could be abolished soon by Congress in a reorganization of Government
foreign policy agencies.

"The Arms Control and Disarmament Agency has been a major tool of U.S. foreign
policy for over 30 years, and it has been invaluable in helping to bring to an
end the cold war," he said.

He said there would be no nonproliferation treaty without the agency and that it
"was the only agency in the 1960's that was in favor of nonproliferation --
against all of the other agencies of the Government."

If arms control policies are to be relegated in the future to the depths of
bureaucracies like the State Department and the Pentagon, Mr. Graham said, "arms
control will almost always lose out."

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Graham Jr. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Down Under, Big Wait and Costs for U.S. Book Releases

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section D;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


Australians have been grumbling about Robert S. McNamara's new book, "In
Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam," ever since it was first
published last month in the United States.

Their dismay has had little to do with the book's morning-after apologies.
Instead, the Australians, with access only to reviews and excerpts, simply want
a chance to read the book for themselves.

The reason they can't, Australian booksellers say, is that the book is not in
their stores. And the reason it isn't is that British publishers, usually the
main suppliers of books to Australia, declined to publish it. Since the
Australian rights were tied to the unsold British rights, there was no immediate
source of supply to meet the unexpectedly high demand.

For years, Australian consumers and booksellers have griped about an Old World
arrangement under which British publishers have won Australian publishing
copyrights when negotiating for titles from the United States and other
countries.

That arrangement came under fire last week in an Australian Government report,
by the Prices Surveillance Authority, on book pricing and imports that
recommended the nation be declared an open market.

Australia, which is part of the British Commonwealth, is a valuable book
territory and has drawn increasing attention from several multinational trade
publishing companies, including Viacom's Simon & Schuster, Advance Publications'
Random House and Bertelsmann's Bantam Doubleday Dell, which have offices there.
The country produces $1.5 billion of annual sales and about half of all books
sold there are imports, many of them American titles republished in Britain.

"Australia is one of the important building blocks used by British and American
publishers to forward their competitive positions," said Alun Davies, president
and publisher of Bantam Doubleday Dell's international division in New York.

Though a growing number of multinational publishers now buy world rights to
books, many agents still sell the British rights separately, and with them a
package of rights for many other former and current Commonwealth nations,
including Australia.

The problem with that system, Australian booksellers and consumers say, is that
the British often choose not to buy the rights to some books or are slow to
publish and restock American books. Books published in Britain are now among the
most expensive in English-language markets, and British publishers have exported
those higher prices to Australia. According to the Government report,
Australians pay up to 19 percent more than Americans for the same books and up
to 15 percent more than British consumers.

Under an Australian law passed in 1991, publishers holding Australian rights
must make new titles available within 30 days of their original publication or
face losing the exclusive territorial copyrights.

British publishers have been lukewarm about books concerning the Vietnam War,
but there has been more interest in books like "In Retrospect" in Australia,
which sent troops to fight alongside American soldiers in Vietnam.

With frustration about the absence of Mr. McNamara's book painfully obvious, the
Australian unit of his publisher, the Times Books imprint of Random House, has
moved to import the book from New York. A representative of Times Books said
yesterday that the 1,500 copies have been shipped. But an Australian bookseller
said his copies had not arrived.

"We still don't have any stock and don't know for sure when it will come," said
David Gaunt, who owns Gleebooks, a large independent bookstore in Sydney.

Though booksellers still complain, the 30-day law of 1991 appears to have
encouraged faster delivery of books and narrowed the gap between American and
Australian book prices. Since the law took effect a growing number of publishers
have begun air-freighting books to the country. British and American publishers
now print about 75 percent of American best sellers in Australia. Some agents
have begun selling separate Australian rights.

Still, the Prices Surveillance Authority took the more drastic step last week of
recommending that the Government declare Australia an open market. "An open
market for legitimate editions is the only option that would give confidence
that prices are determined competitively," the report said.

On the basis of its recent rejection of a similar proposal for the music
industry, the Government is not likely to put the recommendation into law, in
part because of international lobbying efforts by publishers.

But the mere proposal has raised eyebrows among British, American and even some
Australian publishers, who pay large sums to control a certain title in the
market.

"It may be clearer to have an open market than a 30-day rule, but whether that
will bring prices down I doubt very much indeed," said Jon Attenborough,
managing director of Simon & Schuster Australia.

To Mr. Gaunt of Gleebooks, the matter is far from settled: "We aren't convinced
that an open market would reduce prices. What we're more concerned about is that
oftentimes the books are not available here simply because Australian rights are
tied to the British."

The annoyance of Australians with the old system has worsened with the nation's
growing preference for American culture over British and its exposure to
American media.

"We are very much focused with American culture," Mr. Attenborough said. "The
television, magazines, media. People read about books from your media and that
drives demand for them. That is part of the problem."

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Cover Price" shows examples of variations in publisher's prices
among three English-language markets. (Source: Australian Prices Surveillance
Authority)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              203 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Crossing Party Lines on Pollution Bill Clouds Future of Environment Issues

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: KENNEDYVILLE, Md., May 13


Wayne T. Gilchrest knows the tidal patterns around the mouth of the Sassafras
River well enough to point out, as he walked along a marshy promontory, where
the currents and the shoreline had recently shifted.

As a Republican Congressman, he is also caught up in shifting political tides as
the House of Representatives debates a bill that would relax the pollution
controls of the Clean Water Act.

Unlike most in his party, Mr. Gilchrest opposes the proposed legislation, saying
that it would reverse decades of progress in cleaning up the nation's waters.
Votes like his are being closely watched as the House nears its final decision
on the water pollution bill, one of the country's most important environmental
laws and the first to be considered by the new Congress.

Mr. Gilchrest's outspoken opposition to the bill has made him part of an unusual
crosscurrent that is showing up in the debate over the measure, which the House
is expected to pass as early as Tuesday. Indeed, dozens of moderate Republicans
-- including people who, like Mr. Gilchrest, generally vote a fiscally tight,
conservative line -- have spoken out against the bill and voted against some of
its major provisions.

At the same time, an even greater number of conservative Democrats have swung
the other way, and the bill is expected to prevail.

"I don't necessarily have any science background," said Mr. Gilchrest, gazing
out over Chesapeake Bay, which thrusts its tentacles deep into his district and
holds the region's economy in its watery grasp. "I just think this is a nice
place, and I am fighting for it."

Before his election to the House in 1990, he fought in Vietnam with the Marines,
taught high school social studies, lived in a wilderness cabin as a volunteer
forest ranger and painted houses.

On Monday evening, when the House debates the wetlands provisions of the Clean
Water Act, Mr. Gilchrest will be urging changes to the bill's language to
conform to the recommendations of the National Academy of Sciences, which issued
a report on May 8 sharply critical of its approach to wetlands.

Because wetlands are crucial to water quality in the Chesapeake, the state of
Maryland has echoed Mr. Gilchrest's objections to the House bill -- as have the
local fishing industry and conservation groups. That makes his opposition
relatively painless, as does his refusal to take campaign contributions from
political action committees, which form the political muscle of the property
developers who want the law changed.

To be sure, the conservative Democrats can argue just as passionately about
wetlands as Mr. Gilchrest can. Some who want to end Federal protection over most
of the nation's remaining wetlands, as the bill would do, are from states like
Louisiana, where the bayous are as cherished as Chesapeake Bay is here.

"The folks who live there are special to me," said Representative Jimmy Hayes, a
Democrat of Louisiana who helped write the wetlands provision. "The folks who
vote there, and send me to Congress to be their voice, want somebody to say,
'Enough is enough!' and there is a difference between the waterfowl lands that
we know and hunt and the lands in individual residential subdivisions that are
already, for years before, of no more ecological value, but are very important,
as are property rights, to the individuals who now own them."

The bill, after redefining wetlands to eliminate Federal authority over vast
areas, would rank what is left according to the land's ecological value, giving
the strongest protection only to wetlands of the most valued rank, like those
that provide critical habitat for birds and fish.

But to limit development of these most valuable wetlands, the Government would
have to compensate landowners for the resulting decline in property values, a
proposition that could cost billions of dollars.

It is not the only part of the bill that Mr. Gilchrest opposes. He is also upset
about changes that would ease existing requirements for cities to clean up
polluted sewage that surges into streams after heavy rains, provisions that
would grant waivers for industrial pollution permits, and a proposal to reduce
the enforcement of limits on polluted runoff in coastal zones.

In general, the bill would add flexibility to state and local governments in
meeting clean water goals, and would grant major concessions long sought by
industry and agriculture.

Although many local governments and most major business groups support it,
President Clinton has promised to veto it and it is unlikely to pass the Senate
unless it is substantially changed.

Because of the different rules of debate in the Senate, where the loss of a few
moderate Republicans makes any bill prone to a filibuster, and because it takes
two-thirds of each house to override a veto, the crossover votes like those of
Mr. Gilchrest and Mr. Hayes are being closely watched as signals of the emerging
Congressional balance of power on environmental issues, including the Superfund
bill and the Endangered Species Act.

It is not unusual in the 104th Congress -- the first in a generation to be
controlled by Republicans -- for conservative Democrats to join with Republicans
in voting on environmental or other social issues. But there have been few votes
in which so many Republicans have defected as the preliminary votes on the Clean
Water Act. Mr. Gilchrest says he believes that at least 30 Republicans have
serious concerns with the bill, and that after the debate on coastal issues on
Monday and Tuesday it will pass, but not by much.

The voting so far on provisions involving coastal pollution showed how
powerfully local economic interests can draw Republican votes toward stronger
environmental protections than those in the bill.

On May 10, 61 Republicans, including Mr. Gilchrest, voted to support Sherwood
Boehlert, a Republican from upstate New York, on an amendment to strike
provisions that would repeal the Coastal Zone Management Act and fold its
antipollution requirements into other state programs. Republicans from New York,
New Jersey and Connecticut spoke of the vote's importance for protecting the
area's beaches and the tourism industry they support. Only three of the region's
Republicans voted against the amendment.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wayne T. Gilchrest, taking his regular walk near Chesapeake Bay,
is one of dozens of moderate Republican Congressmen who have spoken out against
a bill that would relax pollution controls of the Clean Water Act. (Marty Katz
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              204 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Tam Phu Journal;
In Frugal Vietnam, Imported Snails Dine Regally

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: TAM PHU, Vietnam


Centuries before anyone in France uttered the word escargot, the imperial chefs
of Vietnam knew all about the gustatory delights of the snail. They are a
delicacy here. Common garden snails are gathered in the fields by the handful
and then sauteed with a little garlic and salt.

In the late 1980's, a simple pleasure became big business. The free market came
to long-Communist Vietnam, Adam Smith pushed Marx from his pedestal, and a group
of foreign businessmen decided that snails were one more commodity that Vietnam
should harvest and export to the outside world.

That may have seemed like a good idea at the time. But far from earning their
keep today, snails are threatening Vietnam with what could be its worst
agricultural disaster in a generation, a crisis that mixes mollusks with
Malthus.

Billions of snails -- specifically, the big, imported, teacup-sized gastropods
known as golden snails -- are eating their way through the emerald-green rice
paddies that this impoverished, overcrowded country depends on to feed itself.

According to Government studies, the snails have invaded every one of Vietnam's
53 provinces. They devoured nearly 77,000 acres of rice and other crops last
year.

"Anybody who believes that snails are slow creatures have never been to my
farm," said Tran Van Thieu, 70, a farmer whose rice paddies in this southern
Vietnamese village have been overrun by golden snails. "They eat fast. They
breed fast. They destroy the paddies fast."

Mr. Thieu pulled off his cap and wadded ankle deep into greenish mud of his rice
fields. With his leathery fingers, he began plucking snails out of the muck,
throwing them into his cap to show a visitor.

"You can see they are everywhere," said Mr. Thieu, who figures that about a
third of his spinach and rice crops this year have been destroyed by the
swarming snails. His fields are dotted with what appear to be large, ripe
raspberries but are in fact the raspberry colored egg pods of the golden snail.

The golden snail, a native of South America, was introduced into Vietnam in 1988
by a group of foreign businessmen, most of them apparently Taiwanese, who saw
the snails as a profitable way of satisfying the palates of newly affluent
Asians. (The Vietnamese do not eat golden snails themselves -- they consider the
meat too soft.)

But no one seems to have warned Vietnamese farmers that unlike common Vietnamese
snails, which eat algae and other aquatic plants of no particular value to
humans, golden snails prefer a diet of rice, the main crop of Vietnam.
Scientists here have determined that eight snails can consume one square meter
-- 11 square feet -- of rice paddy a day.

And they breed as quickly as they eat. A single golden snail can lay as many as
25,000 eggs a year, and those offspring can begin laying their own eggs within
two months of hatching. In one stretch of farmland in the northern Vietnamese
province of Vinh, scientists have found more than 200 snails per square yard.

Among mollusks, the golden snail is a survivalist. When fields are drained, they
simply burrow into the mud, where they can survive until the next planting
season.

"This is an epidemic -- a catastrophe," said Vuong Quoc Tuong of the plant
protection department of the Vietnamese Ministry of Agriculture, the man in
charge of the Government's anti-snail campaign. "I'm very much worried that they
are multiplying faster than we can stop them."

The crisis has already attracted the personal attention of Prime Minister Vo Van
Kiet, who banned the breeding of golden snails last September. But many smaller
growers appear to have ignored the ban, and heavy flooding in the Mekong River
and in northern Vietnam helped the snails spread even more widely. Their eggs
simply travel with the currents.

Government scientists are stumped about how to deal with the snails. The harsh
insecticides that are effective in killing the snails also tend to kill off
every other living thing nearby.

"Some chemicals may kill snails, but they also kill fish," Mr. Tuong said. "We
cannot think of using chemicals except where the infestation of snails is very
heavy."

For now, mechanical traps offer the only real hope of controlling the snails.
Scientists are encouraging farmers to place sieve-like bamboo gates in
irrigation ditches to catch them before they can enter the fields.

The Government has called for a national campaign to catch and kill the snails
wherever they lurk.

"We must mobilize the efforts of all Vietnamese -- farmers, schoolchildren,
soldiers -- to find these creatures," said Mr. Tuong, whose office is printing
posters with the snail equivalent of a no-smoking sign, with a snail set in a
large red circle and a line drawn through its spiral shell.


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Children in Tam Phu, Vietnam, gather golden snails, which are
overrunning the country. (Radhika Chalasani/Gamma-Liaison, for The New York
Times)

Map of Vietnam shows the location of Tam Phu.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 877 words



International A3-8

SANCTIONS PUT ON JAPAN
The Clinton Administration imposed a 100 percent tariff on 13 Japanese luxury
cars that accounted for $5.9 billion in sales here last year, including Toyota,
Nissan and Honda's flagship lines. The tariff, the largest ever imposed by
Washington against any trading partner, takes effect Saturday.  A1

POOR RECORD IN PAST DEALS
News analysis: Washington and Tokyo have a long history of coerced agreements
intended to protect American industry from Japanese competition. But the record
of those past deals is at best mixed and at worst a dismal failure.  A1


BLOW TO JAPANESE SECT
With the arrest of its leader in connection with the sarin nerve gas attack on
Tokyo subways in March, it is far from clear whether the Aum Shinrikyo sect will
survive.  A1

Shoko Asahara, the sect's leader, had always sought fame.  A8

MORE TERROR IN TOKYO
The explosion of a parcel bomb in the office of Tokyo's top official suggested
that the terrorism might not be over.  A8

POLISH TANKS FOR IRAN
Despite opposition from the United States, Poland is going ahead with a deal to
sell Iran more than a hundred T-72 tanks.  A3

FRENCH CORRUPTION TRIALS
The presidential election campaign over, French courts have resumed dealing with
a wave of political corruption cases that have tainted all the major parties.
A3

RETHINKING U.N. MISSION IN BOSNIA
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said he was determined to keep United
Nations troops on the ground in Bosnia but under a redefined mandate.  A6

SARAJEVO UNDER FIRE
The heaviest fighting in two years rocked Sarajevo after Bosnian Government
forces used mortars to pound Bosnian Serb military barracks in a suburb of the
city. A6

Tam Phu Journal: Snails get out of hand in Vietnam.  A4

National A12-17, A20

SUSPECT IS SAID TO TAKE BLAME
Two people who have talked with Timothy J. McVeigh since his arrest said he had
taken responsibility for the Oklahoma bombing.  A1

NO ROLE FOUND FOR DRIFTER
Officials said a drifter arrested in Arizona last week did not act in the
Federal Building bombing.  A14

'95 BUDGET CUTS FACE A VETO
Congressional negotiators agreed to cut $16.4 billion out of spending already
approved for the current fiscal year, but White House officials said the
President would almost certainly cast a veto.  A1

DECISION IN PACKWOOD INQUIRY
The Senate Ethics Committee told Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon that it had
found probable cause to accuse him of sexual harassment, a a Republican senator
said.  A1

FIGHT OVER SUBMARINE'S MAKER
A battle broke out over a $60 billion contract to build the Navy's new attack
submarine.  A1

HOUSE MOVES ON WATER LAW
The House approved major changes to the Clean Water Act, signaling that
conservatives have the votes to further their crusade against Federal
regulations.  A17

SPYING ON COMPOSER IS REVEALED
Government documents indicate that the C.I.A. as well as the F.B.I. monitored
the composer Leonard Bernstein into the 1970's.  A12

OFFICIALS LEAVE FUGITIVES ALONE
The authorities in Montana appear to have holstered their weapons and decided to
play it safe as more possible confrontations with fugitives arise.  A15

ANOTHER BLOOD LINK IN TRIAL
A forensic expert testified that blood stains on a glove found at O.J. Simpson's
home matched the blood of Ronald L. Goldman.  A20

Miami Journal: Cubans are split on the returning of rafters.  A12

Education Page B8

Some Republicans are uneasy about changing the cost of student loans.

Why employers aren't interested in workers' high school grades.

Class Notes: Racing a car less powerful than a hair dryer.

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-9

Organic industry faces an ethics question.  C1
A reservation for 1,000, please.  C1
At lunch with Ann Douglas: Feeling safest in New York.  C1
Metropolitan Diary C2
Food Notes C2
Shiso captivates chefs.  C3

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

New English lottery may help two opera houses.  C13
Theater: "Othello" and "A Doll's House." C14
Music: R.E.M. returns.  C13
Cheery concert "Ariadne." C13
A night of Durufle.  C15
Books: On Jewish dislocation.  C17
Book Notes C18
Television: "One Survivor Remembers," the Nazi era.  C18
Touring India by train.C18
ABC's new fall schedule.  C18

Health Page C11

The unexpected peril: strokes in children.
Personal Health: Things that might help prevent breast cancer.

Sports B9-14

Baseball: Mets' Jones stymies Astros.  B11
Indians pound Yankees.  B11
Basketball: Knicks play it cool.  B9
Hockey: Rangers eliminate Nordiques.  B9

Obituaries D19-20

Eric Porter, British actor.  D19
Harry Bergold Jr., diplomat.  D20

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Prayer, by order of government.
Case closed in Japan?
Moynihan's sensible welfare plan.

Letters

Bob Herbert: An ugly school issue.
Thomas L. Friedman: The Turkish nightmare.
Clifford Adelman: A's aren't that easy.
Peter Kornbluh: From here to Cuba.

Chronicle B7

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
Hanoi Gives U.S. New Data on P.O.W.

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 16


United States officials announced today that they had been given "significant"
new documents from Vietnam's Government on missing American military personnel
from the Vietnam War.

However, they did not say if the information would meet President Clinton's
demand that Hanoi show progress in tracing missing Americans before relations
could be improved between the two countries.

"This is significant new information," said Winston Lord, Assistant Secretary of
State, after meetings here with Vietnamese officials.


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

China Pledges Safe Passage Around Isles

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 424 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, May 18


Responding to concern by the United States, Japan and its Southeast Asian
neighbors, China said today that its territorial claim to a group of islands in
the South China Sea is not meant to impede freedom of navigation or the safe
passage of aircraft.

"We hope the ordinary sailing of foreign vessels through the South China Sea
shall not be adversely affected by the existing disputes," said Shen Guofang, a
Foreign Ministry spokesman. The islands, known as the Spratlys in the West and
the Nansha in China, are a potential source of oil.

The statement by Beijing is the first to clarify the nature of China's claim by
separating its territorial dispute with five other countries from international
questions of freedom of the seas. In addition to China, Vietnam, the
Philippines, Taiwan, Brunei and Malaysia also have claims in the Spratly
Islands.

For the Clinton Administration, which has sought to stay out of the territorial
dispute, the issue of safe passage has become a major concern. A key question
has been whether China was seeking to extend its sovereignty over the shipping
lanes, through which 70 percent of Japan's crude oil imports pass.

While Washington has urged the parties to negotiate, it has sought clarification
on the navigation issues from Chinese leaders.

Most recently, the Commander of American forces in the Pacific, Adm. Richard C.
Macke, raised these concerns with Chinese military leaders last month. A Western
diplomat said Admiral Macke was told that China was not seeking to control the
shipping lanes.

The Foreign Ministry spokesman did not elaborate today when asked how Beijing
defined its territorial limit around the 21 islands and atolls, 50 submerged
land spits and 28 partly submerged bits of coral and rock. The Spratlys extend
over 340,000 square miles.

China first pressed its claim to the area through a 1992 law that laid down
regulations for ships seeking to transit the waters. The law also called for the
"immediate eviction of foreign military vessels or vessels owned by foreign
governments and used for noncommercial purposes that violate the laws and
regulations" of China.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry statement follows a new confrontation at Mischief
Reef, 120 miles off the Philippines, where Chinese fishing vessels with military
support have erected permanent structures in defiance of a Filipino claim.

The Philippines Government organized a press tour of the area this week, but the
trip was interrupted by several close encounters with Chinese vessels.


LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows the location of the Spratly Islands.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Mixed Reviews for a Clinton Exhibit

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


Of the 17 miles of corridors in the Pentagon, the most hallowed hallways
commemorate famous battles and famous generals like Dwight Eisenhower and
Douglas MacArthur.

Now, without fanfare and to the displeasure of some career officers, the Defense
Department in the last few weeks has installed a new exhibition honoring "Our
Commander in Chief," Bill Clinton. A long third-floor corridor features 27
framed color photographs, including glossy shots of Mr. Clinton meeting soldiers
in Kuwait, eating with sailors in an aircraft carrier mess, playing his
saxophone in an Air Force band and jogging with troops on a beach.

Some officers consider the exhibition a public relations effort by political
appointees at the Pentagon to boost Mr. Clinton's image with troops who distrust
the President's Vietnam draft record and his position on homosexuals in the
armed forces.

"When I saw it, I just shook my head and said to myself, 'Someone is really
trying to kiss up to the White House,' " said one Army officer, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity.  "It's a Bill Clinton love fest with the military."

Another senior officer said, "These guys are just trying to put a good face on
Clinton."

The White House says it had nothing to do with the exhibition, and in fact a
junior aide to Defense Secretary William J. Perry takes credit for the display,
which cost $7,889.  The Perry aide, a 43-year-old former Clinton campaign
worker, says there is nothing political going on.

"In the Old Executive Office Building and the West Wing of the White House, they
have a lot of blow-up photos of the President," said the aide, Charles Duncan, a
Pentagon liaison with the White House. "So I thought with all the people in this
building, it'd be a good idea to display the Commander in Chief here."

Mr. Duncan described the effort as "all very innocent."

"The President has the greatest respect for the armed forces," he said, "and he
obviously doesn't need to be more familiar. But these photos certainly don't
harm his image."

Mr. Duncan said the exhibition was intended to be permanent and so would feature
Presidents in the future, Democratic and Republican alike. "It's something that
will survive our Administration," he said.

But not all the critics were mollified. Some noted that the Pentagon already had
a special Commander in Chief corridor outside the third-floor executive dining
room -- just around the corner from the new display -- that honors each of the
country's 42 Presidents, Mr. Clinton included, with a biographical plaque.

Some also noted that two vertical photographs in the new exhibit duplicated two
others there ("I ran out of verticals," Mr. Duncan said) and that one photo was
not of the President but of the First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, talking to
an Air Force crew. The inference drawn by these critics is that Mr. Clinton has
been with the troops so infrequently that there is not a sufficient number of
photos to fill out even one exhibit.

Mr. Duncan said he had culled the pictures from the White House photo office and
had selected those with a military theme. "It's an opportunity for people who
work here or for anyone on a public tour to see what this Commander in Chief
does day to day," he said.

That means the display will rotate photographs periodically to show Mr. Clinton
in other, non-military settings. "This won't be limited," said Mr. Duncan.
"There will be pictures of the annual Easter egg roll."


LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A photo exhibit honoring "Our Commander in Chief" now adorns a
long third-floor corridor at the Pentagon, and some officers there, inferring a
public relations effort by Clinton political appointees, are not pleased. (David
Scull/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 19, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Diner's Journal

BYLINE: By RUTH REICHL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 24;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 219 words



More Than Friendly

Weather seems to figure in the names of new Asian restaurants on the Upper West
Side. Monsoon, a Vietnamese restaurant, opened about a year ago, and now there's
Rain, featuring a broader range of Southeast Asian food.

The owners have chosen one of those apparently unlucky locations where
restaurants come and go rapidly. The latest victim was Dish. But if a recent
dinner is any indication, Rain is likely to last.

This is not your basic neighborhood joint. The restaurant has been redesigned,
and is now a beautiful space somewhere between romantic and friendly. One recent
night dates were snuggling in cozy booths undisturbed by raucous children eating
chicken satay and peanut sauce with their families in the red room in the back.

The menu offers pick hits from Vietnam (spring rolls, summer rolls, steamed
fish), Thailand (phat Thai, spicy prawn salad, green curry chicken) and Malaysia
(curry noodle soup, beef with peanut curry). The flavors have been toned down so
that nothing is very spicy or very fishy, but the dishes are cleanly cooked and
beautifully presented. In a neighborhood that could use a few dozen decent
restaurants, Rain is welcome.   RUTH REICHL
 Rain, 100 West 82d Street, Manhattan, (212) 501-0776. Appetizers $5 to $9; main
courses $10 to $21.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 20, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Senior Clinton Aides Urging Full Relations With Vietnam

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Senior Administration officials have recommended that the United States
establish full diplomatic ties with Vietnam, Administration officials said
today.

But Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, and other Republicans have
introduced a bill to derail the proposal.

The question of normalizing relations flared anew on Tuesday after Vietnamese
officials turned over a long-requested batch of documents about Americans
missing in action.

Senior officials said there is increasing pressure in the Administration,
especially within the State Department, to recognize Vietnam. They said that
position is being pushed hardest by Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of
State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, but also by the President's economic
advisers, especially Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown.

These officials and several people lobbying on the issue noted, however, that
some National Security Council aides, notably Nancy Soderberg, chief of staff to
the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, oppose the move because they fear
it could hurt Mr. Clinton politically. Mr. Lake is leaning against full
diplomatic relations with Vietnam, the officials said. Secretary of State Warren
Christopher has not made up his mind, a senior aide said.

The question of recognition is one of the most emotional and delicate foreign
policy issues the Administration faces. On one side are business groups worried
about losing opportunities in the world's fastest-growing region and diplomats
hoping to increase American influence as a counterweight to China. On the other
are veterans' groups, the families of missing American servicemen and White
House advisers who worry about reviving criticism of Mr. Clinton's avoidance of
the draft.

The proposed Republican bill, co-sponsored by Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, one
of Mr. Dole's presidential rivals, said the President should not recognize
Vietnam until it has provided full disclosure of all information about the 1,619
Americans missing in Vietnam.

Senator Robert Smith, a New Hampshire Republican who introduced the bill, said:
"I think the Administration definitely wants to normalize. I think it's on a
fast track within the Administration."

Proponents of normalization have also been scrambling in recent days to thwart
that attack. Two decorated Vietnam veterans -- Senator John McCain, Republican
of Arizona, and Senator John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat -- maneuvered today
to make it easier for Mr. Clinton to grant recognition by saying they would soon
introduce a resolution calling on the President to recognize Vietnam -- a step
being pursued by many business groups as well.

President Clinton lifted the two-decade-old trade embargo against Vietnam last
year, after the Senate approved a bill that those two Senators had introduced
calling for an end to the embargo.

"For the sake of America, maybe it's time we ended the war," Mr. McCain, who
spent seven years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam, said in an interview.
"I believe normalization would be an important part of the healing process."

Administration officials said no formal recommendation would be made to Mr.
Clinton until a Presidential delegation, comprised of officials from the
Pentagon, State Department, National Security Council and Department of Veterans
Affairs, returns next week from a trip to Vietnam and other Asian countries.

Several officials said the President might grant recognition before Secretary of
State Christopher visits Asia in July, well before the presidential campaign
heats up. Others said they would not be surprised if the President played it
safe politically and granted recognition after the elections in November 1996.

Mr. McCain and several Administration officials asserted that normalization is
the best strategy to pursue the main goal of the United States: to gain the
fullest possible accounting of missing Americans. Opening an embassy, they say,
would insure continued cooperation from the Vietnamese and make it easier for
Washington to investigate such cases.

But Senator Smith argues that the only way to gain the fullest possible
accounting is by not granting Vietnam the biggest carrot -- recognition -- until
it has provided full disclosure of all information on the M.I.A.'s.

Other sponsors of his bill include Strom Thurmond, the South Carolina Republican
who heads the Senate Armed Services Committee, and Jesse Helms, the North
Carolina Republican who heads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

Mr. Smith insists that Vietnam is not close to providing all the information it
has. "It still refuses to release a lot of archival information," he said. "We
know based on our own intelligence that there is still information they can
provide us on a number of cases."

Under Senator Smith's bill, the President could grant recognition only after
certifying that Hanoi has been "fully forthcoming" with information about
missing servicemen.

When the Presidential delegation returns from Vietnam, it will analyze the more
than 200 pages of analysis and documents Vietnam provided about missing
Americans.

A senior State Department official said the view held by Mr. Lord, the Assistant
Secretary of State, is that Vietnam deserves recognition because it has provided
all the cooperation about missing servicemen that President Bush asked of it
four years ago, when he laid out a road map of how it might win normalization.

"The Vietnamese are clearly trying to demonstrate as much cooperation as they
can," a senior official said.

According to the President's advisers, Mr. Clinton might approach normalization
in several ways. Having agreed to exchange liaison offices last January, he
might next decide to open an embassy and exchange ambassadors. Another option
would be to announce recognition but send a charge d'affaires instead of a full
ambassador. If Vietnam showed continued cooperation on M.I.A.'s, then a decision
to exchange ambassadors would follow.

To pave the way for recognition, Administration officials said, the State
Department will soon fix up a mansion in Hanoi for the first American
ambassador. In addition, the United States is holding talks with Vietnam about
human rights, and Assistant Secretary of State Robert Gelbard will soon travel
to Hanoi to discuss anti-narcotics efforts.

Corporate America is one of the major forces behind the push for normalization
with this economically dynamic country of 75 million.

Major companies say normalization should include not just recognition but also
preferential trade status. They also want the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation to provide insurance for American companies doing business in
Vietnam and the Export-Import Bank to provide low-cost financing.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 20, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 853 words



International 2-5

A PUSH FOR TIES WITH VIETNAM
For the first time, a number of senior Administration officials have been
recommending that the United States establish full diplomatic relations with
Vietnam.  1



GAZANS GUARD THEIR GUNS
Despite pledges by Palestinian officials to confiscate illegal weapons and
punish offenders, a deadline for licensing of weapons in Gaza has come and gone.
3

ARABS TO MEET ON LAND SEIZURE
Israel's confiscation of Arab land in Jerusalem has galvanized Arab kings and
presidents to begin planning a rare summit meeting in the next two weeks.  3

CHINA ARRESTS DISSIDENT
Chinese officials have arrested a prominent intellectual as he and 55 others
were preparing to issue a call to commemorate deaths at Tiananmen Square.  4

SPLIT IN INDIA'S RULING PARTY
Simmering tensions within India's governing Congress Party broke into open
revolt with a mass rally at which a dissident faction named a new party leader.
4

THAI GOVERNMENT FALLS
The Government of Chuan Leekpai, Thailand's longest-serving elected Prime
Minister, collapsed in the midst of a scandal over a Government land-reform
program.  4

TRUCKERS' LIFELINE TO BOSNIA
The world's riskiest trucking operation has been bringing food and other aid to
those trapped by war in Bosnia, where up to 2.7 million people depend on relief
convoys.  5

WARNING ON BOSNIA PULLOUT
Defense Secretary William J. Perry told the United Nations Secretary General
that pulling peacekeepers from Bosnia would be dangerous for the Balkans region.
5

Montreal Journal: Biker gangs disruption of a city neighborhood.  2

National 6-10, 24

NASA ANNOUNCES CUTBACKS
The space agency said it would cut its work force and streamline operations as
its budget shrinks in an era of austerity.  1

A REPUBLICAN'S DILEMMA
Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine, is in a bind: how to cut spending
without unduly endangering the interests of the people back home who elected
her.  1

FRIEND TIES McVEIGH TO BOMBING
A friend of Timothy J. McVeigh told Federal authorities that he and Mr. McVeigh
inspected the Federal Building in Oklahoma City as a bombing target, officials
said.  1

BUILDING IDENTIFIED AS '83 TARGET
A Federal prosecutor said the Federal Building in Oklahoma City was marked as a
potential bombing target 12 years ago by a white-supremacist group.  6

CLINTON CHALLENGES N.R.A.
President Clinton called on the National Rifle Association to donate the
proceeds from a disputed fund-raising letter to the families of police officers
slain on duty.  7

SENATE REJECTS CLINTON BUDGET
The Senate voted 99 to 0 to reject President Clinton's budget in a political
ritual reminiscent of similar Congressional actions when Republicans were in the
White House and Democrats ruled Capitol Hill.  8

AIDE WILL NOT BE INDICTED
The Whitewater independent counsel has decided not to indict President Clinton's
aide Bruce Lindsey on Federal banking charges.  8

GRAPHIC DESCRIPTIONS OF KILLINGS
Prosecutors in the Simpson case described in graphic detail how they believed
the two victims were killed last year.  7

PRESSURES ON DISEASE CENTER
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention finds itself hard pressed to cope
with the deadly Ebola virus epidemic in Zaire.  9

PROTECTIONS FOR HOMOSEXUALS
The Rhode Island Legislature completed work on a bill guaranteeing civil rights
for homosexuals.  10

Religion: American Muslims seek a better understanding.  10

Metro Digest 25

SPECIAL EDUCATION PROPOSAL
An independent panel released a plan to dramatically restructure the city's
special education program, dismantling a system that now consumes more than 22
cents of every education dollar.  1

GIULIANI CALLS FOR POLICE INQUIRY
Angered by the drunken rampage of several dozen officers in Washington early
this week, Mayor Giuliani called on the District of Columbia police department
to conduct a full criminal investigation and promised New York's support.  1

Business Digest 37

Arts/Entertainment 13-18

Theater: Ensemble Studio Theater.  13

Music: Playing the blues.  13

Artis Wodehouse's recital.  17

Two Russian singers.  18

Dance: "West Side Story Suite." 13

"Romeo and Juliet." 18

Sports 30-35

Baseball: Mets win.  33

Basketball: Knicks force Game 7.  31

Boxing: Jimmy Garcia dies of injuries.  35

Columns: Araton on the Knicks.  31

Obituaries 10-11

Seymour B. Durst, Manhattan real-estate investor and developer.  11

Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23

Editorials

The N.Y.P.D. bacchanal.

China's conscience.

Wayne LaPierre, on the ropes.

Connecticut's bad school choices.

Letters

Russell Baker: Inching down Fifth.

Bob Herbert: Those wonderful kids.

Katherine S. Newman: What inner-city jobs for welfare moms?

Henry I. Miller: The F.D.A.'s fear of the future.

Bridge 18

Chronicle 28

Crossword 16

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              212 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 20, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 23 words


"For the sake of America, maybe it's time we ended the war." -- SENATOR JOHN
MCCAIN, who favors full ties with Vietnam. [4:3.]

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 20, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Religion Journal;
American Muslims Seek A Better Understanding

BYLINE: By GUSTAV NIEBUHR

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 637 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


By now, a month after the bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, many
people may have forgotten the initial reaction to the crime, when some news
reports and some politicians blamed unknown "foreign terrorists," probably from
the Middle East.

But that remains a vivid and unpleasant memory for some American Muslims.

"For one-and-a-half days, all the fingers were turning to point toward Muslims,"
said Maher M. Hathout, a Los Angeles cardiologist who is president of the
Inter-religious Council of Southern California, an interfaith group, and serves
on the board of the American Muslim Council in Washington. "It was a major
exposure of the prejudices in this country."

Last week, with two distinctly non-Middle Eastern suspects implicated in the
bombing, Dr. Hathout and two other Los Angeles Muslims came to Capitol Hill to
talk with three California Congressmen about how, when it comes to public
discussion of issues relating to Muslims, national leaders can help to keep the
discourse within thoughtful bounds.

The meeting, held in the Rayburn House Office Building, was attended by
Representative Howard L. Berman, a Democrat, and Representatives Steve Horn and
Ed Royce, both Republicans, said Salam al Marayati, director of the Muslim
Public Affairs Council, a nonprofit group that supplies information about Islam.
He accompanied Dr. Hathout, along with Aslam Abdullah, editor of The Minaret, a
quarterly Muslim magazine published in Los Angeles.

Describing the meeting, Dr. Hat hout said he tried to make the rather modest
point that a gap existed between American policy makers and American Muslims,
but that it could be bridged through personal contacts. He also underscored that
certain Muslims, like himself, could offer insights that might be useful in
understanding the nature of Islamic fundamentalism and political trends within
Islamic movements in the Middle East.

"If I talk about Islamic movements overseas," Dr. Hathout said. "it isn't that
I'm criticizing them or defending them, it's just that I understand them
better."

He said he told the Congressmen, "If you call on us at any time, we'll be here."

Tom Waldman, Mr. Berman's press secretary, said the meeting had been arranged
before the Oklahoma City bombing and grew out of discussions that Mr. Berman and
Dr. Hathout had participated in about the war in Bosnia.

Lately, Dr. Hathout said, he has been trying to make the point that even
well-meaning people can say things that hurt, rather than help, American
Muslims.

He cited a remark that he said he had often heard: that most Muslims are fine,
decent people. "I equated that statement with saying, 'A box of chocolates is
good, but one chocolate is laced with cyanide,' " he said. "You stay away from
the whole box."

Mr. Marayati said he had read an interview with former Secretary of Defense
Robert S. McNamara, much in the news since the recent publication of his book
"In Retrospect" (Times Books/Random House) about American policy in Vietnam, in
which he said Mr. McNamara cited as a reason for the United States' failure in
Vietnam the lack of understanding of the Vietnamese people and culture.

Mr. Marayati said he was concerned that a similar ignorance prevailed among
United States officials about Muslims overseas, particularly in the Middle East.

"The one thing we had with the Soviet Union is we had experts," Mr. Marayati
said, "real experts -- not self-styled experts -- who were able to give us
information and avoid a confrontation."

It was as experts that Dr. Hathout said that some American Muslims might help
out. "We are offering ourselves," he said. "It really is as simple as that,
because we have too much at stake, as immigrants who came in pursuit of freedom,
as people who are bringing up their children in this society."

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 21, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   4   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2      2   2   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) Over the years, a prosecutor finds that an
                unusual murder case haunts her career and private life.

 3      3  64   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 4      4   4   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 5      5  48   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 6      6   7   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 7     13   2   BEAUTY FROM ASHES, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A
                Georgia family endures the divisive stresses of the Civil War.

 8      9  145  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 9*         1   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 10     7  13   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 11     8   7   A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy,
                a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.

 12         2   THE CAROUSEL, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $23.95.) Compulsion
                and revenge threaten the survival of a family dynasty noted for
                its respectability.

 13    10   4   CHILDREN OF THE JEDI, by Barbara Hambly. (Spectra/Bantam,
                $21.95.) The "Star Wars" New Republic sends a mission to find
                long-lost people.

 14    11  31   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 15    15   9   PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four
                poems celebrating women.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   4   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 2      2  32   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 3      5  63   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 4      4  21   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 5      3  14   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 6      7   5   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 7     11   3   MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                actress reminisces about her four decades in Hollywood.

 8          1   LISTEN TO MY HEART, by Kathie Lee Gifford and Cody Gifford.
                (Hyperion, $12.95.) The television personality tells her 4
                1/2-year-old son about matters like family relationships and
                good manners.

 9      9   4   MODEL, by Michael Gross. (Morrow, $25.) The growth of modeling
                from a small business into a huge industry.

 10         1   PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist
                tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill
                daughter.

 11    18  74   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 12    12   8   THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank. Edited by Otto H.
                Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive
                edition."

 13    14  37   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 14         2   LIZ, by C. David Heymann. (Birch Lane/Carol, $24.95.) A
                biography of Elizabeth Taylor.

 15    16   9   BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) A
                discussion of ways computers will change our lives in the
                future.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  104  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 2         50   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 3      2   9   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 4      3   6   MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Maintaining passion.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 6, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

GOD: A Biography, by Jack Miles. (Knopf, $27.50.) Not a joke but a scholarly,
entertaining literary inquiry into the character called God as His multiple
personalities have been rendered through the ages in the Hebrew Bible.

THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg.
(Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a
wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct
under the old regimes.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

LANDSCAPE AND MEMORY, by Simon Schama. (Knopf, $40.) A learned and perceptive
survey of Western attitudes toward nature in the last five centuries; Mr.
Schama's starting point is the Renaissance fascination with river, forest and
mountain as signs of a revered prototypal world.

THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES, by Robert Musil. Translated by Sophie Wilkins and
Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the
unfinished and unfinishable novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and
Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged
readership.

OSWALD'S TALE: An American Mystery, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.)
Stoked by a passion to believe J.F.K.'s death was more than a meaningless
absurdity, Mr. Mailer pursues and delivers the assassin's very slightly
significant soul, using his own research and that of others.

POPE JOHN PAUL II: The Biography, by Tad Szulc. (Lisa Drew/Scribner, $27.50.)
Mr. Szulc, a seasoned reporter of Polish birth, inquires into the special
circumstances of Polish Catholicism and the special stresses of fascist and
Communist domination that formed the present Pope.

RIDING THE RAP, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $22.95.) A dandy re-readable
thriller set in post-modern America, land of wised-up rabble and zero
authenticity; its crooks intend a whole new crime, never perpetrated before.

A RIVER TOWN, by Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $24.) It's 1899 in
Mr. Keneally's impassioned 21st novel, and Tim Shea, an outsider in an Australia
with no insiders, inexorably digs himself into deeper and deeper trouble by
always trying to do the right thing.

RULE OF THE BONE, by Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $22.) A novel that
reinvigorates the Huck Finn myth in the person of Chappie, a mall rat from
upstate New York who lights out for Jamaica with a runaway farm worker.

WALT WHITMAN'S AMERICA: A Cultural Biography, by David S. Reynolds. (Knopf,
$35.) An intensive historical excavation, aiming to show how Whitman, an
enthusiast for almost everything, transmuted into his poetry images from all
aspects of American culture.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENDPAPER;
HO, HO, HO CHI MINH

BYLINE: By DEANNE STILLMAN;   Deanne Stillman is a contributing editor of The
Los Angeles Times Magazine. She also writes for film and television.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 92;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


MASTER OF CEREMONIES: Folks, immigrants are what make this country great,
especially when they're funny and bring in a lot of money for nightclubs. As you
can tell from the festive balloons at every table there's a fabulous national
healing that's going on. So as we prepare for another wonderful century, let's
all ponder the incredible lesson that we Americans have learned -- those who
fail to remember the past are unable to cash in on it. Yes, joining our great
heritage of ethnic jokemeisters -- Amos 'n' Andy, Myron Cohen, Jose Jimenez,
Yakov Smirnov, Margaret Cho . . . is the funniest man in the jungle! Folks, put
your hands together for . . . Charlie Duc Tho!
CHARLIE (takes center stage to sound of firecrackers going off): Incoming! But
seriously. . . . Thank you, thank you! This is a wonderful club, you're fabulous
people and I'm lucky to be here. . . . Frankly, I'm lucky to be anywhere.
Waiter, could I have a drink? Thank you. Hey, I know. I need booze like Vietnam
needs Slim-Fast. Am I right?

Listen, folks, I'm gonna let you in on a little secret. I make it a practice
never to drink before midnight. Fortunately it happens to be midnight in Da
Nang. . . . You know, last week I got so loaded they made me use the freight
elevator. . . . Then there was the other night. I came home, stumbled into bed,
and told my wife I loved her. She said, "Honey, are you drunk?" I said, "No, I'm
having a napalm flashback."

Folks, I'm kidding. My wife's a beautiful person. Even though she can't keep
house. Junk all over the place. At my house, we don't have spring cleaning, we
have a spring offensive! Listen, my place is so dangerous you need a mine
sweeper to find dinner! And the bathroom -- my shower is so greasy it looks like
Haiphong Harbor after a tanker spill. . . . Hey, that's what happens when your
wife is Hanoi Hannah. Hello? Am I talking to a rice painting, or what? O.K.,
time for a body count! Just kidding.

Don't get me wrong, I love your country. Reminds me of the old days in Saigon. I
miss the hustle and bustle, the hurly-burly, the nitty-gritty, the cheap smack!
You know, the other day I thought I was back in Dien Bien Phu.The sun was
setting, a soft breeze was blowing, I could smell the jasmine . . . and I felt a
sudden urge to go out and booby-trap some foreigners. Folks, I'm kidding.

You know, everything in Vietnam is different now. We used to have the Ho Chi
Minh Trail. Now it's the Ho Chi Minh Expressway. There's a diamond lane for
water buffalo that commute in pairs.

And remember when everyone was a student at the People's Re-education Camp? Now
there's mandatory enrollment at Hamburger U. But I hear there's a problem. Every
time the teacher says "Big Mac Attack," the whole class dives for cover.

But business is really picking up in Vietnam. Calvin Klein is selling
stone-washed pajamas. Al Cowlings has a 900 number. And guess what? There's a
Hanoi Hilton and it's really a hotel!

But hey, listen, you gotta hand it to a country that's trying to rebuild itself
after spending two decades without car fresheners! You know, Vietnam has some
really heavy problems. I'm not kidding. I'm as serious as I have ever been in my
entire life. I'm gonna say something I really want you to think about. You heard
about a problem Vietnam has had with a chemical called Agent Orange. Folks,
there's good news and bad news about Agent Orange. The good news is that my
mother-in-law lived in a village that was completely wiped out by Agent Orange.
The bad news is that she was the only person to fully recover!

So you win some and you lose some. . . . Am I right? Hey, did Robert McNamara
apologize or what? Speaking of winners and losers, I wanna talk to you about
some incredible winners -- my pals, the boat people. Remember the boat people,
that amazing media fad? Well, they're still here. In fact, I see that the
president of the boat people chapter of my fan club is here tonight. He's the
guy doing all of the heckling. But that's O.K. I know where his shrimp nets are
and I'm gonna tell Bubba! You all know about Bubba, right? Bubba hates gooks.
Tried to run them out of Galveston. Just kidding, Tran. That's his name. Tran
Van Sanh. His parents wanted something easy to remember. That's a joke, Tran.
Folks, my buddy Tran is an excitable type. Turns everything into a Pueblo
incident. Remember that? Twenty years ago, those guys were traitors. Now they're
heroes. I tell you, this crazy globe of ours, it's too much, really.

And this country. Hey, how can you not give it a really big bear hug? I mean
this is the place where former hookers from Saigon now earn big bucks at beauty
salons where they inhale toxic fumes all day and apply acrylic nails. Is that
amazing or what? People, I wanna leave you with one thought tonight. Life is a
demilitarized zone, defoliation rhymes with radiation and somewhere back in the
old country the guy from "The Deer Hunter" is playing Russian roulette with the
guy from "Platoon." Think about it.

Thank you and good night.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Who's the Enemy Now?

BYLINE: By Claudia Dreifus;      Claudia Dreifus has recently interviewed
Benazir Bhutto, Myrlie Evers and Ben and Jerry for the Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6;     Page 34;     Column 1;     Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2981 words


THERE'S A HUMOROUS, SELF-DEPRECATING QUALITY TO John Shalikashvili, 58, the
first draftee and the first foreign-born soldier to rise to Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. If the image of a four-star general is that of a
Patton-style warrior -- gruff, laconic, righteous -- then Shalikashvili is an
iconoclast: witty, thoughtful, accessible through three interviews totaling more
than three hours. He fudges rarely, and laughs often, sometimes at the ironies
of his life story.

In many ways, Shalikashvili's narrative has the broad sweep of a David Lean
movie. The grandfather of America's top soldier was a czarist general, and his
father, Dimitri Shalikashvili, was a Georgian nationalist who fought the Red
Army, worked as an officer for the Polish military and, after Poland fell in
1939, joined Germany's Georgian Legion in the hope that Hitler might defeat
Stalin. At the end of World War II, the Shalikashvilis settled in Bavaria,
living as poor relations on the estate of aristocratic relatives.

The family immigrated to Peoria, Ill., in 1952 when John was 16. He was drafted
in 1958, and rose quickly through the ranks. For 16 years, he held command and
staff positions in Germany, Korea and Vietnam as well as in the United States.
By the 1980's, Shalikashvili (pronounced shah-lee-kahsh-VEE-lee) had become a
general, and gained a reputation for political and military smarts. Thus, in
1991, Generals Colin Powell and John Galvin picked him to run "Operation Provide
Comfort," a military-political effort aimed at saving the lives of half a
million Kurdish refugees starving in the mountains of northern Iraq. "He has
unique qualifications as a combat arms officer and yet he is enormously
sensitive to human suffering," says Powell.

When Powell was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he made "Shali" his
assistant; he was later sent to Europe as Supreme Allied Commander of NATO. In
1993, Shalikashvili returned to Washington to succeed his mentor as the top
soldier at the Pentagon. "When you think that someone who didn't come to this
country until he was 16 could rise to be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, this is
unique in the world," Shalikashvili says with a smile. "Despite all the bad
things that we are fond of reciting about this country, it's incredible that a
kid can come here and do this."

Q: Former Secretary of Defense McNamara recently declared that the United States
should have withdrawn from Vietnam after the murder of Diem. He said, "We were
wrong, tragically wrong." As a Vietnam veteran, what did you think when you
heard that?

A: Disappointment. A degree of frustration, because there's an implication --
I've not read his book -- that these are things that the men who were in
leadership positions knew, but did not do anything about.


Q: McNamara told this newspaper that similar mistakes are being made in
Washington today. He pointed to Somalia and Bosnia as examples.

A: To compare Somalia to Vietnam is factually and morally wrong. Somalia was a
totally different humanitarian effort -- to save lives. So is America's role in
Bosnia. It's unfair for me to sit and try to make judgments on what I have not
read. But if the question is, "Can one compare the Vietnam conflict with
America's role in something like Somalia or America's involvement in something
like Bosnia," it's patently wrong.


Q: Last November, when Senator Jesse Helms was saying senior military figures
thought Clinton unfit to be Commander in Chief, you took the unusual step of
publicly disputing him. Why?

A: One of the great things about this country is that we in uniform swear
allegiance to the Constitution, which says that he who has been elected
President is Commander in Chief. We have a long tradition of not debating
whether he's right or wrong. I didn't want anyone to misread Senator Helms's
remarks and assume that senior military people were involved in a debate on the
Commander in Chief. I was worried about [his statement] being misunderstood by
the soldiers: that somehow it was all right for us to hold this kind of debate.


Q: It's your view that President Clinton's "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy is
working well. How exactly is it doing that?

A: It meets the needs of the services, and I think it properly safeguards the
rights of the individual. For right now, we have struck the right balance.

Q: Were there people you served with who you knew were homosexual?

A: It wouldn't surprise me, but no one comes to mind.


Q: Do you agree with the premise that homosexuals are security risks?


A: No. Those arguments might have been made earlier when someone out of fear of
exposure could have been blackmailed. Those days are probably waning, if they
aren't already behind us.


Q: Let me ask you about women in the military. The armed forces are a beacon to
the rest of society in race relations. Why can't they be the same in creating an
atmosphere of tolerance in these other areas?

A: They are. Some 25 to 26 percent of all our R.O.T.C. cadets are women. That's
enormous. Point me [out] any other United States institution [in which that is
true]. Can we talk about the clergy or Congress or the leadership of General
Motors?


Q: But you've made such progress in the racial area, more than the civilian
sector, and then you read about women in the military academies complaining
about sexual harassment.

A: They certainly have been complaining of sexual harassment in the academies,
and any amount of sexual harassment in the academies is wrong.  My sense is that
we should never condone any kind of demeaning behavior of one person to another,
one group to another, but we also need to understand, as we judge, how it
compares to [the] same sort of behavior somewhere else. I don't feel apologetic
at all.


Q: Except the difference is that the military does have the ability to solve
problems that other sectors don't.

A: I think you've put your hand [on] it. And I hope that we will be at the
forefront and will continue to drive out sexual harassment not just at the
academies, but throughout the forces.


Q: As part of the Contract With America, the House of Representatives voted to
restrict American soldiers' serving under foreign commanders. How do you feel
about such limitations?

A: I think there are aspects of that Contract With America, particularly the one
that deals with command and control, that, in my eyes, are an unwarranted and
perhaps even unacceptable infringement upon the flexibility the President must
be allowed to retain.

Look, throughout our history, there've been Americans under foreign commanders.
We have it today. It is correct to demand that whenever we do so we have a clear
understanding that the person commanding is competent, that the rules under
which he commands are acceptable to us, that the rules of engagement you give to
the soldiers are proper so that they can correctly protect them.  Another issue
that bothers me [in the Contract] is this notion that you can legislate when one
can extend the [NATO] alliance. It's one thing for the Congress to express the
view that the alliance ought to be extended. It's another one to argue that by
such and such a time, you must admit. . . .


Q: Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic. . . .

A: That's right. This is not for us alone to decide. This is an extraordinary,
complex process: one on which the stability, if not the security of Europe
hinges. If you do it on some kind of a time line, you stand in danger of doing
more harm than good.


Q: One senses you're not in any great hurry to expand NATO.

A: I have argued that before we talk about an expansion we ought to have
something like what I can modestly say I had some part in [originating], the
Partnership for Peace, the development of a relationship between partners and
the alliance that would bring them closer to us in a meaningful way, that would
allow them to become more like us.


Q: And also not scare the Russians?

A: Yeah, and it certainly allows the Russians also to come closer to the
alliance through the Partnership for Peace.

Q: Are you one of those people who was astonished when the cold war ended?

A: I think all of us were. People who gave this much more thought than I
couldn't imagine it. What they thought was that the cold war would ebb and flow.
But [not that] the Soviet empire would come to an end. And this is very
different from the end of World War II, the last upheaval of a whole political
and social structure. Then, there were people who argued [about whether] the war
would end in '45 or '46, but they knew it would end and that the world would be
very different afterward.

This time, there wasn't anyone who seriously asked, "How do we work with a
Europe that is no longer confronted by Communism?" A lot of the problems we are
witnessing now are due to this. If it took us 10 years to get our house in order
after World War II, it is going to take us every bit the same now -- if not
longer.


Q: Your father, the lifelong anti-Communist, did he live to see the end of
Communism?

A: No, though till the day he died, he dreamed of going back to Georgia.  Toward
the end of his life, he stopped believing this was going to happen. My mother
did live to see the change. She was born in St. Petersburg, fled that city after
the Revolution, saw it renamed Leningrad and lived long enough to see it renamed
St. Petersburg again.


Q: As a child, did your father speak to you much of his native Georgia?

A: Oh, yes. My father always thought of himself as a Georgian. He had traveled
to Russia and became an officer in the czarist Army. After the overthrow of the
Czar, there was a narrow window when Georgia was an independent country. He and
his brother were on an official mission to Ataturk's Turkey at about the time
that Georgia was overrun by the Communists. Eventually, my uncle joined the
French Foreign Legion. My father went to Poland. In the early 1920's the Polish
Army was looking for foreign contract officers. It was in Warsaw that my father
met and fell in love with my mother, another refugee from St. Petersburg.


Q: One of the rumors about you is that your maternal grandmother was a
lady-in-waiting to the Czarina. True?

A: I think so. She was German. She'd moved to Russia at an early age and married
a Russian officer, my grandfather, who later became a general. As I was growing
up, my mother told me vivid stories about court life in St. Petersburg, about
Rasputin and about the family's flight from St. Petersburg after the Communists
took over. I thought they lived a very exciting kind of a life. Others would
think of my childhood as something sad because of all the turmoil. But I
remember it as exciting and fun. During the Warsaw Uprising in 1944, I remember
moving through sewers because you couldn't get from one side of the street to
the other. I remember being bombed in Warsaw and the building collapsing over
us. I saw these things not with fear, but somewhat as an adventure. Children can
be so resilient.


Q: When did your family come to America?

A: In 1952. From Germany. We were stateless. I've never been a citizen of any
other country except the United States, which I became in May of 1958. In June
of 1958 I graduated from Bradley University. And in July of '58 I was drafted.
[Laughs] An exciting three months for me.


Q: After all the dislocations of Europe, what was it like to immigrate to
Peoria, Ill.?

A: Exciting.


Q: You may be the only person in modern history to describe Peoria as exciting.

A: For a 16-year-old European, it was an adventure. I think I was expecting
wagon trains to be still crossing the Mississippi. There were no wagon trains,
but it was still marvelous. Oh, there were some antsy moments of feeling shy and
insecure, but everything seemed bigger and wider and cleaner. I liked Americans
instantly. There wasn't all this formality that exists in Europe. One other
thing about Peoria. Because it was the Middle West, it has its rock-iron value
system. This clear sense of right and wrong.  And people are not flashy. Not
fancy. I feel very comfortable with that.


Q: One of the legends about you is that you learned English from John Wayne
movies.

A: Partly true. I studied English in Germany. Still, when I came here, I felt
comfortable saying "Yes" and "No," and not much more. So I went to a movie
theater after school, and sat there, and watched the movies at least twice. The
second time around, the English words began to make sense to me. I must have
gone to all kinds of movies. But I remember most the John Wayne movies.


Q: As the son and grandson of professional soldiers, were you always interested
in entering the family trade?

A: I went back and forth about it. At Bradley University [in 1954] I enrolled in
Air Force R.O.T.C. and then lo and behold, I found that my eyesight was not good
enough to be a pilot. After that, I convinced myself that I really didn't want
to be in the service. As soon as I graduated, I was all prepared to make lots of
money in a comfortable civilian life. But then, I received my draft notice. And
it was an absolute shock to my system!

That feeling stayed with me until I went on my first assignment as commissioned
officer. I got sent to a very exciting place -- Alaska. We would go on these
long-range patrols on skis. I remember an instance where we went up to Point
Barrow, the northernmost Eskimo village in Alaska, and with Eskimo scouts with
dog teams, went out on the ice cap. Eventually, I came to think, "If life is
like this in the military, then it's for me."


Q: During your confirmation hearings for Chairman, a reporter went through your
late father's papers at Stanford University and discovered an unpublished memoir
he'd written of his World War II experiences. In it, your father casually
mentioned that after the fall of Poland, he joined Germany's Georgian Legion so
that he could fight against Stalin. He also says he was briefly under the
discipline of the Waffen SS. Discovering this, and having to answer for it
before the Senate, must have been one of the toughest moments in your life.

A: It was. It probably gave me reason to think about my father more than I had
before. He was in no way that kind of man. I think you would have found him to
be a remarkably gentle man. But you know, it's amazing how a war like this
tosses and twists you and turns you around and what situations you find yourself
in.

[During the confirmation hearings] there were two issues I wanted to bring out.
On one hand, I wanted to leave no doubt that this was not an issue of me
withholding something. Secondly, while my father's unit was associated with the
Waffen SS, he was never himself a member of the Waffen SS. I think what happened
was that my father never thought of it as something horrible. If he had, why
would he have written about it? Why would he have taken his papers and given
them to Stanford University?


Q: About Bosnia. In the past, you've asserted the West overestimates the
military power of the Serbs. Is that still true?

A: Sure. I believe that whenever we have been resolute -- NATO particularly --
we have been able to have our way. Whenever that was so, the Serbs read it very
correctly and acted accordingly. And I am frustrated that we are often prevented
from doing it, and lately more so than not.


Q: Many members of the new Congress are opposed to using military forces for
humanitarian missions. They say that soldiers should fight, not be relief
workers.

A: And there are some in the Pentagon who'd be very happy if I put outside a
sign that read, "We only do the big ones." The notion that we exist, first and
foremost, to fight our nation's wars is something I subscribe to. But I also
say, "In this new world, we cannot deny our Government a very important tool to
try to manage crises, bring stability to an area, deal with operations that
overwhelm traditional humanitarian organizations." But you have to be selective
-- or you could fritter away resources and capabilities.


Q: The military has defined readiness as the capacity to fight two simultaneous
wars in two different parts of the world. With base closings, troop reductions
and budget cuts, are we still able to?

A: I believe so. But we have always said that we will be able to engage in two
widely separated conflicts providing we continue to improve our ability to lift
forces and to command and control forces into separated areas of the world. It's
not easy to do. It talks to the issue of how many satellites you have to provide
you with intelligence, communications. There are enhancements to that force that
we said from the beginning we'd need.


Q: Who do you perceive as the greatest security threat to America?

A: Always, always, the greatest demon is our own complacency, our sense that the
world is safe and that we don't have to worry.

Today, we understandably worry most about our interests in the Middle East and a
place like Korea. [But] we need to avoid being too fixated on Iraq or North
Korea. I worry about a place like Iran in the years to come. In its support for
terrorism, I think Iran is a potential threat to the whole region. Its actions
in the Strait of Hormuz recently, all of that leads you [to] wonder what their
aims are. Listening to the rhetoric coming out of Iran, it's hard to conclude
anything other than they are very much opposed to the sort of things we and our
friends stand for.


Q: Do consider yourself more a man of the New World or the Old?

A: The preponderance must be New World. The proof of it is whenever I spend any
time overseas, I am just delighted to come back to the United States. The
strudel might be nicer in Germany, the Big Mac is an awful lot better over here.
And I happen to like it better. I like more what this country stands for.

NAME: John Shalikashvili

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The future four-star general learned a lot of his English from
John Wayne movies. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID ROSE/SYGMA, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
They're Movies, Not Schoolbooks

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1825 words


WHETHER THE SUBJECT IS THE Black Panther Party or quiz shows, Thomas Jefferson's
sex life or Dorothy Parker's accent, there is one reaction moviegoers can expect
when a historical film appears: the scolding, finger-wagging "tut-tut" response.
As in, "Tut-tut-tut, Robert Redford changed the facts." Or, "Tut-tut-tut, Mario
Van Peebles left facts out."

Mr. Van Peebles's current film, "Panther," which presents a saintly version of
the early days of the Black Panther Party, has become a predictable lightning
rod for the tut-tut critics from the left (former Panthers territorial about
their stories) and the right (conservatives who see the Panthers as outlaws with
no redeeming qualities). The director and his father, Melvin Van Peebles, who
wrote the screenplay, have created a sometimes powerful and often unfocused
movie. They have been treated as if they were charlatans trying to pull a fast
one on the American public.

In "Quiz Show," one of the best films of 1994, Mr. Redford and the screenwriter
Paul Attanasio bent the facts to enhance the film's drama. On screen, Richard
Goodwin (Rob Morrow) cracked open the quiz show scandals single-handedly, which
was not the case in life. Off screen, the film makers were treated like
schoolboys who had done sloppy homework. "Jefferson in Paris" is currently
receiving the same condescending treatment, just as "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious
Circle" and "Immortal Beloved," a fictional biography of Beethoven, did last
year, following the pattern of Spike Lee's "Malcolm X" and Oliver Stone's
"J.F.K."

But these film makers know exactly what they're doing: taking dramatic license.
Mr. Van Peebles creates a lopsided positive view of the Black Panthers to offset
what he sees as a lopsided negative one. "Panther" is a drama and a polemic. It
deserves to be judged on those terms, not as if it were a grade-school lesson
plan.

Presenting history on screen is not a simple issue or a new one. But the recent
boom in historical films has been greeted by just-the-facts reactions that are
simplistic about both history and art. Such responses naively assume that an
accumulation of facts equals truth. But a collection of facts is no more than an
almanac. History is the interpretation of those facts, and even ostensibly
"objective" versions have some implicit point of view.

And as artists have always known, a deeper knowledge -- about character,
philosophy or politics -- often emerges from the gaps between the facts. One of
Faulkner's crafty narrators puts it this way in "Absalom, Absalom!" (a novel
about discerning the truth of the past through the imagination): "There is a
might-have-been which is more true than truth." Film makers need dramatic
license if they are to discover the more profound truth of that might-have-been.

It is revealing that so many people now expect fact-based fictions like
"Panther" and "Jefferson in Paris" to be educational tools instead of art or
entertainment. Such narrow, pedagogical responses to movies tend to be tremulous
and fearful. Beneath the nit-picking about facts, there are usually more potent
questions: How dare they say the Panthers were good? That quiz shows were bad?
That Jefferson slept with his slave? How dare they challenge convention? The
tut-tut reactions suggest much about the loss of faith in American education,
about the influence of the movies, and about the link between storytelling and
social power.

"Panther" was created as a deliberate challenge to established power. The cliche
that history is written by the winners cuts deep. If Mario Van Peebles rewrites
history, he claims a power that seriously shakes up anyone who thought the
Panthers were dead. As many commentators have noted, Mr. Van Peebles uses facts
selectively to suit his purpose. He ignores drug use and rampant sexism among
the Panthers and plays down their violence. No historian could take that kind of
license, but any artist can.

This is not to say that movies should be stupid or ill-informed; like most
recent historical movies, "Panther" is neither. The film represents real
characters, like the Panther founders, Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale, and puts
them in scenes with fictional ones. It uses some clips from television news,
adding black-and-white scenes of the actors that look as if they were clips from
television news (a strategy meant to enhance the illusion of reality, and not
likely to dupe anyone). Stressing the group's full name, the Black Panther Party
for Self-Defense, the film is clearly a plea to see its characters as victims
fighting for their rights in a world of racism and police violence.

It's no accident that "Panther" ends in the late 1960's, when the group's
violent history gets trickier to explain. And while F.B.I. documents clearly
reveal a Government plan to eliminate the Panthers, the film has its own crazily
narrow theory. It presses hard on the idea that the entire problem of drug use
in America today comes from an F.B.I. plot to put drugs into Panther
neighborhoods, a scheme that got out of hand.

Precisely because it is so opinionated and polemical, "Panther" adds an
important voice to the continuing debate about the Black Panthers.  There has
been a recent spate of books by and about the Panthers. "A Taste of Power," the
1993 autobiography of Elaine Brown, who ran the party for a time in the 70's,
has been praised for its honesty in revealing sexism among the Panthers and
attacked for diminishing Ms. Brown's own role in its violence. "The Shadow of
the Panther," Hugh Pearson's recent biography of Huey Newton, has been praised
for offering a balanced view of the Panthers as idealists gone wrong and
attacked for dwelling on the drug use and violence, possibly even murder, in
Newton's later years.

Since "Panther" opened, Bobby Seale has given interviews saying the film is 90
percent fiction. Most of his interviewers have also noted that Mr. Seale has a
movie of his own in the works. Is a film with Mr. Seale behind it likely to be
less opinionated and more "accurate" than the work of Ms. Brown and Mr. Pearson
or Mr. Van Peebles?

History books are expected to provoke such wrangling; movies are unfairly
expected to provide a phantom "truth" that doesn't exist. The reason has to do
with the vast influence of films and television. No doubt, movies sometimes
substitute for history that isn't being taught well in schools. But to expect
film makers to become pedagogues is to throw up your hands at the idea that
education can be improved. It is also to ask them to exercise a scary
self-censorship and to create less daring art.

Those movie-as-schoolroom expectations are based on an exaggerated fear that
children will learn history from a single film. Despite endless fussing about
"J.F.K.," there do not seem to be millions of schoolchildren convinced that
members of the United States Government conspired in the Kennedy assassination
to prolong the war in Vietnam. What is really at issue is not the use of fiction
to tell history, but the use of fiction to challenge history's accepted views.

There is a distinction between dramatic license and outright lying, of course. A
film claiming that the Holocaust didn't happen, for example, would cross a
crucial line, going beyond dramatic license into sheer irresponsibility. The
line itself can be fuzzy (some people would argue that "J. F. K." crossed it),
but a large majority of historical movies are far from that dangerous border.
Most historical films are making defensible arguments; the only way such films
can work as art is to assume a strong position.

Artistically, "Jefferson in Paris" is eloquent and subdued. Historically, it is
largely faithful to the outline of Jefferson's days as envoy in France. Nick
Nolte is strong and restrained as the cerebral Jefferson, who falls in love with
the married Maria Cosway (Greta Scacchi). But the most effective part of the
movie is one in which its creators -- the director James Ivory, the producer
Ismail Merchant and the writer Ruth Prawer Jhabvala -- were forced to make a
great dramatic leap. After two centuries of debate, a love affair between
Jefferson and one of his slaves, Sally Hemings, remains a tantalizing
possibility because no one has been able to prove that it did not happen. The
film makers assume that the affair occurred, a choice that frees them to explore
the characters more deeply than a cautious factual approach would have allowed.

THE SCENES BETWEEN Jefferson and Hemings (Thandie Newton) reveal a lonely,
passionate man who usually kept his emotions at bay. The film goes easy on
Jefferson by making Hemings a flirt, eager to leap into her master's bed. In
this film he may be a slave owner, but at least he isn't a sexually harassing
slave owner. Here is a cautious characterization of Jefferson, but it succeeds
in depicting his reluctant submission to passion. The scenes are much livelier
than those between Jefferson and Cosway, whose intense relationship with
Jefferson is so well documented that historians can agree the affair was
probably a chaste one.

Fine though it is, "Jefferson in Paris" also proves that taking dramatic license
is no guarantee of artistic success and that walking a careful line between fact
and fiction may be disastrous. The film includes some howlers that come from
trying too hard to be faithful to the letter of history, ignoring its larger
truth. Jefferson's famous "head and heart" letter to Cosway, in which he
portrays his emotions struggling with his intellect about their relationship, is
presented on screen at an outdoor picnic, its lines scattered among a dozen
guests as if it were a parlor game. Here the film preserves his words but
squanders one of the few important windows on the soul of the emotionally
reticent Jefferson.

Whatever their assumptions, movies like "Panther" and "Jefferson in Paris" posit
theories about truth and ask audiences to consider what history means. "Quiz
Show" explores weighty historical issues, including the idea that the American
dream of egalitarianism may be hollow or at least shaky. In showing television
to be a purveyor of illusion, the film assumes that truth is something
complicated, something to be sought out. Truth is more than a collection of
quiz-show facts. With "Quiz Show," the tut-tut critics let audiences off the
hook by focusing on the film's minor dramatic license and encouraging viewers to
dismiss its more provocative questions.

These simplistic responses can also serve a purpose, though. By their very
existence they can prod viewers to think about movies, to challenge the film
makers' theories, to judge them the way they would judge any serious work of art
that blends fact and imagination. No one could possibly want to hear another
word about "J. F. K.," but get ready. Oliver Stone is at work on "Nixon," with
Anthony Hopkins as the President about whom everyone has an opinion.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Marcus Chong as Huey P. Newton in the film "Panther" -- A
saintly version of recent history, but with a cause: to challenge some accepted,
negative views. (Robert Zuckerman/Gramercy Pictures) (pg. 1); Jennifer Jason
Leigh in "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle" -- Condescending treatment. (Joyce
Rudolph/Fine Line Features); Nick Nolte and Thandie Newton in "Jefferson in
Paris" -- Positing theories about truth. (A. Borrel/Buena Vista Pictures) (pg.
18)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: VILLAGES, EAST AND WEST;
The Return of the Mosaic Man (And Clash of the Titans)

BYLINE: By MONTE WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 6;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 430 words


Back in the late 80's, when Jim Power installed mosaics of broken dishes, glass,
stones and crystal on more than 60 light posts in the East Village, he enjoyed a
virtual carte blanche. After four years in Woodstock, Mr. Power returned in
January and began restoring his works. He did not get the welcome he expected.

In late February, a patrol car pulled up to the curb, at Second Avenue and St.
Marks Place, where Mr. Power was working, and an officer asked him if he had a
permit.

"I said, 'What permit?' " he recalled.  "I'm the guy who put the thing here in
the first place."

Mr. Power said he was told to stop working until he obtained a permit, or he
would be arrested. He complied and started going through city channels to get
his permit, only to become frustrated by red tape.

"I have a lot of respect for the police, and I want to do this the right way,"
Mr. Power said. But he admitted that he had trouble deciphering the city
bureaucracy and was not sure whether he needed a permit from the Department of
Transportation, which has jurisdiction over light posts, or the city Art
Commission. The Department of Transportation told him that it was the Art
Commission's decision, but rather than go to them, Mr. Power decided to take
more direct action.

Last week, he showed up outside the Ninth Precinct, taunting officers with a
newspaper article about alleged police corruption in the Bronx. Several days
earlier, Mr. Power, who frequently flails his arms wildly and talks rapid-fire,
stormed into the precinct waving a petition with what he said were 700
signatures of people who support his work.

"I think I alarmed them," he recalled. "I said, 'What are you guys doing? Most
of you don't even live in the neighborhood!' " He also threatened to slap his
mosaics on light posts outside the precinct. "I told them I'd be a nuisance,"
said Mr. Power, who, at 47, resembles an aging hippie with his long white
ponytail and beard. "The Constitution says if something interferes with your
safety or happiness, it is your duty to respond. It doesn't say go get a
permit."

The way Mr. Power sees it he is only trying to improve people's quality of life
by "beautifying" the area.

"I don't get paid for this," said Mr. Power, a Vietnam veteran and Alphabet City
"homesteader" who receives a $500 per month disability payment because he is
blind in one eye. "I've hurt my knees kneeling on the ground doing this work. I
think people visiting Wall Street expect to hear the stock market, people who
come here want to see what goes on in the arts."   M.W.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The "Mosaic Man," Jim Power, has returned to find a different
city. He says he hasn't been allowed to brighten up the East Village.
(Photographs by Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: SOUTH BRONX;
Remembering Carlos Lozada And Hill 875

BYLINE: By JESSE MCKINLEY

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 9;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 551 words


Carlos Lozada Playground, named for a Vietnam War hero killed in 1967, sits
about 30 yards from the Major Deegan Expressway in Mott Haven. When the park is
empty, the agitated hum of cars and trucks is constant. But lately, on any
afternoon that school is out, the only thing you can hear is kids.

The 3/4-acre playground at East 135th and Willis Avenue was officially reopened
two weeks ago, after an eight-month reconstruction by the Parks Department, at a
ribbon-cutting ceremony attended by Mr. Lozada's family, a military honor guard,
children from adjacent Public School 154 and members of Mr. Lozada's brigade,
the 173d Airborne.

"I have been feeling horrible for so long that Carlos died so far from home, all
alone," said Mr. Lozada's widow, Linda, who attended the ceremony with her
daughter, Yvette, who was a week old when her father saw her for the last time.
"Seeing those men there, I'm sure someone was with him."

Mr. Lozada, a Bronx native who used to play stickball in the neighborhood, was
killed during the battle for Hill 875 on Nov. 20, 1967. A 21-year-old machine
gunner, he was credited with killing at least 25 enemy troops and was awarded
the Medal of Honor posthumously.

Tucked amid the dull brown towers of the John Purroy Mitchel Houses and near two
other elementary schools, the park, built in 1964 and renamed for Mr. Lozada in
May 1968, has always been popular with the neighborhood children. But in recent
years, it had deteriorated.

"It was dirt, garbage," said Alex Oquendo, who grew up nearby and now works as
the parks associate for the playground, cleaning it five days a week and
organizing basketball tournaments. Now, the playground sports a smooth surface,
fresh jungle gym equipment and a newly painted set of basketball courts. The
result? "You can't get the kids out of here," Mr. Oquendo said.

The renovation marks the beginning of a partnership between the Parks
Department, which paid for the $585,000 renovation, and members of the Mr.
Lozada's brigade, who have pledged to pay for maintenance of the park. "We
consider Carlos our brother, and his family, our family," said Anthony
Albarello, a former colonel in the 173d Airborne and president of the local
chapter of brigade's commemorative society, "Now we've made a promise to the
community of the South Bronx."

At the dedication ceremony, pamphlets telling the story of Mr. Lozada's life
were distributed. Sinclair Acey, assistant dean of P.S. 154, said that some
students whose brothers and sisters had attended the school already knew about
the local hero. For others, it was the first look at a photo of the man whose
name was common. Their reaction was a mix of respect and awe. "Kids would say
'Why is the park named was for this guy? Who was he?' " Mr. Acey said. "When
they find out, they say, 'I would like to be a hero, too, but I wouldn't want to
die.' "

Mrs. Lozada, who lives in Tampa and has stayed close to Mr. Lozada's family, has
attended other memorials to her husband over the years. Generally, she said,
they just depress her. But this time, she was not as blue when she left the
Bronx for home. "It made me realize I shouldn't feel so guilty" about her
husband's death, she said. "It took me 28 years, but it's not so bad this time
around."   JESSE McKINLEY

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of the Bronx

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Killed in Chechnya: An Army's Pride

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SPECTER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: GROZNY, Russia


EVERY city has its special tourist attractions, even this one. Most days Russian
soldiers eager for the essential souvenir from this shattered region make their
way to the charred wreck of the Presidential Palace.

There, standing atop tanks or leaning against the bomb-scarred entrance, they
pose for snapshots, trying to look gallant, proud and victorious.

"This way I can prove that I was part of the stupidest campaign of our time,"
said Pvt. Gennadi S. Pekayev, a 20-year-old gunner in a tank batallion from
Sverdlovsk. "If I live I can show this picture to my grandchildren and tell them
how the Russian Army was destroyed."

Agony and fear have long been the Russian soldier's lot. Few armies have
suffered as much over the centuries. Perhaps none has sacrificed more lives in
defense -- and expansion -- of its country's territory. During World War II,
there were nearly 14 million people in Stalin's armies, and in the 1980's the
Soviet Union still had the world's largest fighting force, with 3.7 million
conscripts.




The Good War

Defense of the motherland always brought pride and respect to soldiers and their
families, especially during World War II, when millions of soldiers died.
Generations of Soviet schoolchildren were raised to revere the military. "Where
did you serve?" used to be a good way to start a conversation. That changed, of
course, with the war in Afghanistan. The Russian military -- still immense with
almost 2 million soldiers -- has been on a steady, sad slide for years.

But the special bitterness of the Russian soldier fighting in Chechnya, and the
almost universal willingness to express that anger to foreigners with notebooks
in their hands, is hard to believe. As their fathers and grandfathers sat in
Moscow and celebrated the central Russian military victory of the century -- the
defeat of Nazi Germany -- the kids in and around Grozny could only feel numb and
reach for the vodka.

Soldiers always complain: theirs is a life of privation. But the frog's eye view
of the Chechen war goes way beyond griping. Drinking begins each day at 4 P.M.
If a single shot is fired, hundreds of volleys are returned by the terrified
recruits afraid of their own shadow.

From commanders to grunts, in the mountains, the cities and on the rich green
plains of Chechnya, Russian soldiers detest this war. They have no idea why they
are fighting and blame the people who run the country, particularly President
Boris N. Yeltsin and Defense Minister Pavel Grachev, for their fate. Food is
sometimes scarce. Ammunition stocks are so uneven that planned offensives have
often had to be delayed or curtailed. After five months, uniforms have started
to fray, but not as badly as morale. Salaries, which average $20 a month, are
rarely paid.

"We are here to show that the man who runs Russia has real power," said Sgt.
Vladimir Kalunin, stationed near Samashki, not far from the mountains here where
the fighting is now heavy. "The empire is dead and nobody can face it. So we are
here to show that Russia is still a great power. But every day we are here we
show the opposite. I have never been in another war, so I don't know what morale
was. But other soldiers fought to save Russia. We fight to save Yeltsin."

That may be simplistic, but teen-agers who come under fire to defend their
country need to be able to reduce motivations to something pithy. This war, most
soldiers say or suggest, seems dirty, unfair. They do not take pleasure in
razing villages and cities. They can hardly believe that the top commanders,
including General Grachev, have never visited them in the field.

It is not as if these are just sweet, simple and scared boys who love the
Chechens. Russian soldiers, many of whom have now seen heavy battle, are ready
to believe almost any myth about the Chechen fighting machine. They have no
heart to storm the mountains where the rebels are now centered; instead the
military relies on aerial bombardment with little accuracy. But it is hard to
look at the elderly villagers in occupied Chechnya, or the shards of the city of
Grozny, and see a nation of enemies. "I have relatives who spent their whole
lives in Grozny," said Pavel T. Mashkov. "They are Russians. This is a Russian
city. So we have now destroyed a Russian city. I can go home and tell my friends
we killed our cousins."

It took years for American soldiers in Vietnam to come to a deep appreciation of
the hopelessness of their cause. The same was true for the Soviet debacle in
Afghanistan. It has taken less than five months for the average fighting man
here to become cynical about everything but the bottle. It is hard to find a
single soldier here convinced that Russia will "win" this war.




No to Zhirinovsky

Russian soldiers have often supported the right-wing extremist Vladimir V.
Zhirinovsky. To them he displayed a sense of pride in the country. But today,
many of those in the field blame his expansionist view, especially his
oft-repeated desire to reclaim the republics of the former Soviet Union for
greater Russia, as part of the reason they are here. So there are few kind words
for Mr. Zhirinovsky

Not surprisingly, perhaps, the most popular political figure among the boys
serving in Chechnya is a man who is not a politician: Gen. Aleksandr Lebed, the
highly controversial army officer who has been a constant critic of the war from
the day it began. He is the one leader who seems to show constant concern for
the cannon fodder these Russian soldiers have become.

"We support who supports us," said one young fighter holding a weapon and
wearing a bright red bandanna that showed up nicely in the Polaroid he had just
taken in front of the Palace. "Nobody supports us. We support nobody. I sure
hope this is an important war. Because it's going to kill us all."

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Under Chechen fire by night, a soldier naps by day. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Asia, Fears U.S. Bill May Impede Boat People's Return

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 20


Legislation has been proposed in the United States Congress that could result in
offers of resettlement to half the 40,000 Vietnamese boat people now facing
deportation to Vietnam from camps throughout Asia.

The proposal has alarmed the United Nations and some Asian Governments because
it threaten to scuttle an international effort endorsed by the Clinton
Administration to send home the last of the Vietnamese in the camps.

The plan is contained in a foreign affairs appropriations bill drafted by House
Republicans. Although the Administration opposes the measure, it has already
been approved by the House International Relations Committee and is awaiting a
vote before the full House.

The bill would earmark $30 million for the resettlement of up to 20,000
Vietnamese who have been seeking asylum in the United States, while placing
nearly insurmountable obstacles to new American contributions to the United
Nations-backed program to return the last of the boat people to Vietnam. The
United States has promised to provide about $25 million to the program this
year. Prospects for the legislation are uncertain.

Refugee workers say that word of the American plan has already begun circulating
in detention camps in Hong Kong, and that some of the Vietnamese who had once
agreed to return home voluntarily are reconsidering because of the possibility
they may be allowed instead to fulfill their dream of resettlement in the United
States.

"Many of these people would be refugees by any fair definition of the word,"
said Representative Christopher H. Smith, a New Jersey Republican who is a
member of the International Relations Committee and a sponsor of the plan. "It
is grotesque that we should now be paying to force them back to Vietnam."

Refugee workers say that, even if the bill is rejected by Congress or vetoed by
President Clinton, the renewed debate in Washington may have convinced many
Vietnamese to resist deportation, as they recognize there is still a powerful
constituency willing to fight to let them into the United States.

The people now in the camps are the last of more than a million Vietnamese who
fled their homeland, many in rickety boats, after the Communist troops of North
Vietnam overran the southern half of the country in April 1975. Most of the
so-called boat people ended up in the United States.

If the House plan became law, it would mean a reversal of American policy, which
for several years has held that the vast majority of Vietnamese who remain in
camps in Asia are economic migrants who have no realistic fear of persecution in
Vietnam and who are thus not entitled to asylum.

Although the State Department would not be forced to offer resettlement to
20,000 Vietnamese if the bill became law, the $30 million earmarked for the
program could not be spent for any other purpose.

Jahanshah Assadi, the chief of mission in Hong Kong for the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, characterized the House proposal as "playing with
fire."

"People in the camps are being given false hopes and false expectations," he
said.

Mr. Assadi, who oversees detention camps that now hold 21,000 Vietnamese, warned
that if word of the American proposal reached Vietnam, it could set off another
exodus of people who would see it as a new chance to go to the United States.

"It doesn't take very much to spark that off," he said, noting that nearly 1,000
Vietnamese left the country last year in boats headed for Japan, apparently as a
result of unfounded rumors that the Government was offering jobs and cash
payments to migrants.

The 40,000 Vietnamese who have not been resettled or returned home have been
denied status as political refugees and are waiting to be sent back to Vietnam
either voluntarily or by force. In addition to the camps in Hong Kong, there are
large camps in Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand.

The House plan has outraged officials in Hong Kong, which has been trying for
years to shut the detention camps there by persuading -- or forcing -- the
Vietnames to go home. The camps have turned increasingly violent as thousands of
Vietnamese there face the prospect of being forced to board airplanes headed for
Vietnam.

Just today, 19 Government riot officers in Hong Kong were injured as they
battled Vietnamese who were protesting attempts to move them to a different
camp. [In a statement early Sunday, officials in Hong Kong put the toll of
injured at nearly 200, The Associated Press reported. Most of the injured were
riot policemen who were using tear gas to end the demonstration and were
attacked with spears and rocks, The A.P. said. The disturbances continued early
Sunday.]

On May 11, 47 Hong Kong police and corrections officers were wounded, including
two who were stabbed, in a battle with other Vietnamese detainees who were
desperate not to return home. At least eight Vietnamese were injured.

The South China Morning Post, the city's largest English-language newspaper,
suggested in an editorial on Thursday that the American plan was being offered
by politicians "blind to the havoc created on this side of the Pacific by their
attempts to expiate that guilt" about the plight of the boat people.

In a statement, Representative Smith contended that many of the Vietnamese now
in detention camps had been unfairly denied refugee status because of inadequate
screening. He said some camp residents had been "persecuted for anti-Communist
political views, for religious practices or for past associations with the
United States."

Because of the American involvement in the Vietnam War, he said, "we Americans
have a special relationship to people who have managed to escape from Vietnam."

"These are our guys," he said. "We left them behind."

The United Nations, which is responsible for monitoring the condition of the
71,000 Vietnamese who have been returned home, says it has been unable to
document a single case in which a returning migrant has faced persecution.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Legislation before the United States Congress could scuttle
efforts to send Vietnamese boat people in camps throughout Asia back to Vietnam.
At a Hong Kong camp yesterday, police fired tear gas when Vietnamese rioted
because of efforts to move them to another camp. The disturbances worsened
today. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In One Doctor's Way of Life, a Way of Death

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1497 words

DATELINE: BLOOMFIELD HILLS, Mich., May 19


Long before his name became synonymous with death and defiance, Dr. Jack
Kevorkian had signaled to anyone paying attention that he worked and played by
his own rules.

As a medical student at the University of Michigan in the late 1940's, he began
measurements of the pupils of cadavers on the theory that his findings would
change the imprecise science of estimating the time of death. The work was
ignored.

In 1960, he wrote a book proposing the vivisection of condemned prisoners,
brushing aside objections that a doomed man's consent would have doubtful moral
validity.

As a pathologist at a suburban Detroit hospital in the 1970's Dr. Kevorkian
experimented with transfusing blood from fresh cadavers to volunteers, infecting
one of them with hepatitis. He had read that the Soviet Army did this during
World War II, and he believed the procedure could save American battlefield
casualties in Vietnam. The hospital dismissed him.

By now most of the world knows that Dr. Kevorkian went on to focus his contempt
for medical and ethical conventions on the technology and practice of assisted
suicide. So far, 23 men and women, terminally ill and in the grip of pain or the
fear of pain and longing for death, have perished with his help.

In early cases, they pressed buttons that released potassium chloride, a
compound used in execution by lethal injection, into their veins. They died in
his old Volkswagen bus or in rented cabins or on the old nappy red sofa in his
home. When the authorities suspended his medical license and he could no longer
buy the drugs, he rigged industrial canisters of carbon monoxide to face masks
and let his subjects pull a clamp off the gas hose.

The most recent patient to die was 27-year old Nicholas John Loving of Phoenix,
who, in the agonizing final stages of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou
Gehrig's disease, ended his life on May 12. His body was left in Dr. Kevorkian's
rusting van parked at a county office building outside Detroit -- to save the
police the burden of fetching it, said his lawyer, who called a news conference
after the corpse was delivered.

Now Dr. Kevorkian's ardent campaign in the cause of painless suicide is
approaching a new hurdle. Earlier this month, as a select group of the doctor's
friends and supporters attended a recital of his musical compositions at the
University of Michigan, a state Court of Appeals panel handed down a blistering
decision upholding a five-year-old injunction against Dr. Kevorkian's work.

The decision tightens the legal noose put in place by the Michigan Supreme Court
last December, when it ruled that assisting in suicide was a crime, based on
common law. The United States Supreme Court refused to hear Dr. Kevorkian's
appeal.

"Defendant has made clear that neither the actions of the Legislature, the
executive, nor the judiciary will sway him from his course," the three-judge
appellate panel wrote in the decision. "We will see."

Now prosecutors in the suburban Detroit counties of Oakland and Wayne, where
most of the suicides occurred, must decide whether to go to court once again
against Dr. Kevorkian, a slight, almost penniless 66-year-old man whose public
support in Michigan is about 60 percent, according to polls last year. So far,
neither county's chief prosecutor has announced how assisted suicides would be
treated.

The state Legislature may once again try to enact a law against assisted
suicide, to replace the one that had been stayed by the lower courts on
technicalities, and which has now expired.

Whatever the authorities decide, they know they will be taking on a determined
man whose very contradictions make him hard to classify.

Dr. Kevorkian, who refused to be interviewed for this article, describes his
cause as a war against suffering. He has never used his medical skills to help
or comfort the non-terminally ill, having turned almost immediately after
medical school to pathology.

"You have to know death to understand life," he has often said to explain his
choice.

Dr. Kevorkian is obstinate because "he hates authority figures," said Geoffrey
Feiger, his lawyer. Yet the doctor is himself by all accounts overbearing and
contemptuous of anyone who disagrees with him, calling his critics "Nazis,"
"eunuchs" and "mental cripples."

"You know, he has always lived in this man's world, where you tell people what
to do," said Janet Good, the president of the Michigan chapter of the Hemlock
Society, which advocates the right to medical suicide. "I love him."

Family members of people who have taken their lives with Dr. Kevorkian's help --
he always makes sure all family members support the decision -- describe him as
gentle, loving and kind. Yet in his public statements, Dr. Kevorkian expresses a
scalding contempt for the frailties of humankind.

"It's human obstacles, human thwarting, human insensitivity, human
irrationality, human insanity, human barbarism that always impinges, infringes,
tears, destroys," he told the audience at a suburban Detroit Presbyterian church
in January 1994 at the kickoff of an unsuccessful drive to amend the state
constitution to allow assisted suicide. "And so you've got to put it in
writing."

Gov. John Engler and the Legislature, which had enacted the law banning assisted
suicides, were "mentally infirm," he declared, to a flutter of laughter from his
listeners.  Singling out a baby in the audience, he added, "Governor Engler, the
Senate, all those people in Lansing have said, 'That child doesn't have the
right not to suffer. The child must suffer.' "

But while the moral question of assisted suicide plays itself out across the
nation in forums as public as referendums and as intimate as doctors' offices,
many people on both sides of the issue have long questioned whether Dr.
Kevorkian is the right person to lead the cause of gentle self-induced death.

"He is the only one to do it, because the medical profession won't" said his
friend Dr. Stanley Levy, a general practitioner and art collector who has
testified in Dr. Kevorkian's behalf. "The profession's response is the hospice
system. It says, 'You can die, but you have to take your time doing it.' "

No one disputes the breadth of Dr. Kevorkian's mind. He has written several
books, including the one defending prisoner vivisection and one, "Prescription:
Medicide," about assisted suicide. His musical skills are self taught, on flute
and keyboard, yet he can score a piece for several instruments. He also paints
-- large grisly canvases of death and decay. One features a decapitated corpse
at dinner over its own severed head, an apple in its mouth; another portrays
Santa Claus smothering Jesus in the manger. A third shows a starving child
eating a corpse.

No one in Dr. Kevorkian's immediate family has lived to 70, and he is terrified
of his own death, Mr. Feiger said.

"He'll lie and say he isn't," Mr. Feiger said. "But he is. He's scared to
death."

When he was on trial in Wayne County for the first suicide, in 1990, Dr.
Kevorkian sat in court studying Japanese verbs and practicing mirror writing, in
view of the jury. He was acquitted.

But Dr. Kevorkian's critics see other elements in his life besides his obvious
brilliance.

"He's a product of a life of failure," said Michael Modelski, who led the
prosecution at that trial, but is now in private practice. "He has always been a
crackpot and a fanatic. The 'Dr. Death' thing started when he was at the
University of Michigan, and he thrived on it, but nothing he tried worked out.
Experimenting with dead people's corneas, the blood transfusions from cadavers,
it was all a failure. Now he's in his late 60's and at last, people are paying
attention to him."

Murad (Jack) Kevorkian, who will turn 67 on May 26, was born in Pontiac, Mich.,
to a family of Armenian immigrants. His father was a pipe fitter, and he was the
first in his family to attend college. He served in the Army as a doctor during
the Korean War and did his internship at several Detroit area hospitals,
including Pontiac General, now South Oakland Medical Center, where he performed
his transfusion experiments.

After 20 years in Michigan, Dr. Kevorkian moved to Long Beach, Calif., where he
worked at several hospitals. Mr. Feiger confirmed reports that Dr. Kevorkian
sometimes lived in the Volkswagen camper he had acquired while working at two
hospitals at once.

In 1984, Dr. Kevorkian left California for Michigan, never to hold a another
job. He lives in extreme simplicity, on Social Security and some savings, in a
house provided rent-free by Mr. Feiger.

After California, Dr. Kevorkian tinkered with inventions, building a working
prototype of a pontoon bicycle and a disposable sun visor for sports fans. He
had some samples of the visor printed with the Detroit Lions logo and showed
them to the team management, Mr. Feiger said, but they were not interested. As
everyone else in the region already knew, the Lions play indoors.


NAME: Jack Kevorkian

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jack Kevorkian, the Michigan doctor whose campaign in favor of
assisted suicide faces a new obstacle now that the state Court of Appeals has
upheld a five-year-old injunction against his work. (Associated Press); Janet
Good, president of the state chapter of the Hemlock Society, which advocates the
right to medical suicide, supports Dr. Kevorkian. A painting by him hangs in her
home in Farmington Hills, near Detroit; Dr. Stanley Levy, a friend of Dr.
Kevorkian, said of his championing of assisted suicide, "He is the only one to
do it, because the medical profession won't;" Michael Modelski, who led the
prosecution at Dr. Kevorkian's first trial in 1990. "He has always been a
crackpot and a fanatic," Mr. Modelski said. (Photographs by Peter Yates for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              223 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT;
Relatives of Marines Killed in Air Crash File Suit

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 40;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


Relatives of four marines killed in the crash of a Presidential helicopter are
suing several companies, charging that they were negligent in the craft's
design, manufacture and maintenance.

The wrongful-death suit, filed last week in New York State Supreme Court in
Manhattan, named the Sikorsky Aircraft Division of the United Technologies
Corporation, the Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation and General Electric in the suit.
Sikorsky is based in Stratford, Conn.

The Navy helicopter, a Sikorsky VH-60N Black Hawk that once carried President
Clinton, crashed May 19, 1993, near Nanjemoy, Md., about 25 miles
south-southwest of Washington. The craft was on a post-maintenance checkout
flight.

Francis Fleming, the lawyer for the marines' families, said Navy investigators
speculated that a component of the control system -- the load demand spindle --
was improperly replaced after maintenance work on the helicopter.

Improper replacement of the spindle might have caused a mechanical linkage to be
misaligned, Mr. Fleming said.

Mr. Fleming, who said he flew Sikorsky helicopters in Vietnam, said this was not
simply a case of human error by the ground crew. He said that manufacturers
prepare the work manuals and guidelines and usually keep a technical
representative on hand to instruct and direct the ground crew.

The suit charges that the defendants were negligent in the design, manufacture,
testing and maintenance of the aircraft, and that they issued instruction
manuals that were inadequate and erroneous.

William Tuttle, a spokesman for the Sikorsky Aircraft Division, said, "It's our
policy not to comment on ongoing litigation."

Rick Kennedy, a General Electric spokesman in Cincinnati, declined to comment
and referred inquiries to the Marine Corps.

Families of each of the four men are seeking compensation for negligence, breach
of warranty and product liability.

The victims were the pilot, Maj. William S. Barkley Jr., 39, of Hickory, N.C.;
the copilot, Capt. Scott J. Reynolds, 33, of Wausau, Wis.; the crew chief, Staff
Sgt. Brian D. Haney, 32, of North Ridgefield, Ohio, and the official observer,
Sgt. Timothy D. Sabel, 27, of Ripon, Wis.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              224 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Court Revisits The Last Days Of Doris Duke

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 35;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 2841 words


On April 5, 1993, the woman once called "the richest girl in the world" lay
feverish and emaciated in a luxury hospital suite in Beverly Hills, suffering,
of all things, from starvation.

Doris Duke, 80, the legendary tobacco heiress, looked more like a blond skeleton
than the athletic debutante who had made her society debut in the 1930's at
Buckingham Palace or the stately and private woman who only a few years before
was socializing with Jacqueline Onassis and Imelda Marcos.

Her circle had shrunk to a few servants and a group of doctors and lawyers she
had known only a short time. As she signed her last will that day with a shaky
hand and turned her fortune over to her butler, not a single close friend or
family member was present.

Her doctors and lawyers say they helped Miss Duke realize her final wish in a
lifetime of unorthodox choices. The will gave control of her $1.2 billion
fortune to her butler, Bernard Lafferty, a barely literate man with a drinking
problem who had become Miss Duke's sole confidant.

But since her death October 28, 1993, Miss Duke's last will has been the center
of a legal fight in Surrogate's Court in Manhattan and a criminal investigation
in Los Angeles, tying up what Miss Duke intended to be a $1 billion fund for
charity.

In the next few days, Surrogate Eve Preminger is expected to make the first in a
series of crucial decisions that will determine who will run a charitable
foundation that will rank among the nation's largest.

First she has to rule on whether Mr. Lafferty is responsible enough to be
executor. Then she has to decide whether one of Miss Duke's former physicians
has legal standing to challenge the will. Finally, the Surrogate has to decide
whether to validate the final will -- and whether Miss Duke was coerced into
signing it.

Several people who were named executors in earlier wills have accused Mr.
Lafferty, a soft-spoken man with a ponytail and a penchant for diamonds and
Italian suits, of worming his way into Miss Duke's confidence while her mind was
crippled. And in Los Angeles, the District Attorney is investigating allegations
by one of Miss Duke's private nurses and one of her former doctors that the
butler conspired with other doctors and lawyers to murder Miss Duke with a drug
overdose.

Aside from the question of foul play, hospital records and court papers paint a
disturbing portrait of Miss Duke at the end and raise serious questions of how
much control she had over her decisions.

The records show she was taking several medicines -- antidepressants,
painkillers, sleeping pills -- which at least three doctors have said in
affidavits might have interfered with her thinking. Also, two former servants
now say that Miss Duke was often dazed and confused in her last year.

Two weeks ago, a lawyer appointed by Surrogate Preminger to help sort out the
battle concluded that Miss Duke's primary doctor, Charles F. Kivowitz, purposely
cut her nutrition and hastened her death with a morphine overdose.

The lawyer, Richard H. Kuh, a former Manhattan prosecutor, also determined that
her mental state was "questionable" when she signed the will. His report cited
hospital records showing Miss Duke often had a mild drug-induced delirium.

Lawyers for Miss Duke's estate have challenged the Kuh report with reams of
affidavits from friends and business associates attesting to her mental
competency.

The stakes are high. If the will holds up, Mr. Lafferty will get a $5 million
executor's fee plus $500,000 a year for the rest of his life. The law firm that
drew up the final will, Katten, Muchin & Zavis of Chicago, has already billed
the estate $13.5 million and stands to get millions more.

Heiress
Lonely, Suspicious And Reclusive

In interviews and court papers, Miss Duke's friends and former employees
describe a lonely old woman who grew more and more isolated from others and
dependent on Mr. Lafferty in her dotage. As her health declined, they said, her
natural suspicion of people's motives grew, and she changed her will four times
in the last three years of her life.

Ever since her father, James Buchanan Duke, told her on his deathbed to "trust
no one," she had been suspicious of those around her -- many of whom were
sycophants and fortune hunters, they said. Time and again, she had cut people
off at the first sign of disloyalty.

"She once said to me that she often felt that whenever some people looked at
her, they saw her face as a dollar bill," Annabelle Kenessy, an old friend from
Hawaii, said in a court affidavit.

Miss Duke was born on Nov. 22, 1912, the only child of the American Tobacco
Company president, who had built a $300 million fortune.

But her acquaintances say she craved the things money could not buy: talent,
love, friends. She took jazz piano lessons religiously and studied dance until
she was well into her 60's. She loved gospel music, rare animals and Islamic
art. She kept a pair of camels on her 2,700-acre main residence, Duke Farms in
Somerville, N.J.

Her money could never protect her from unhappiness; she had two failed marriages
and several unsuccessful relationships. In 1940, she bore one child, who lived
less than 24 hours. In 1966, Eduardo Tirella, an interior decorator who was a
close friend, was killed in an accident when the car she was driving slammed him
against a gate on Rough Point, the Newport estate.

As she grew older, she became more reclusive, dividing her time between homes in
New York City, New Jersey, Beverly Hills and Hawaii.

It was in Hawaii, in early 1984, that Miss Duke met the woman who would
eventually become the daughter she never had -- Chandi Heffner.

Ms. Heffner was a follower of Hare Krishna who had rejected her middle-class
upbringing in Baltimore and was living on a communal farm when she was
introduced to Miss Duke through a mutual friend. The two shared an interest in
dance, Eastern philosophy and animals, Miss Duke's friends said. Before long,
they became close.

In 1985, Ms. Heffner moved in with Miss Duke at Somerville. The next year, the
heiress bought Ms. Heffner a $1.5 million horse ranch in Oahu. They traveled the
world together at Miss Duke's expense.

"She always wanted a daughter," said Peggy Lee, the singer, a longtime friend of
Miss Duke. "Chandi filled an empty spot in Miss Duke's life."

Ms. Heffner introduced Miss Duke to Bernard Lafferty, former employees said.
Orphaned at 17, Mr. Lafferty had emigrated from Ireland to Philadelphia, where
he worked in hotels and theaters. In the 1980's, he became a personal assistant
to Miss Lee, who met him on a singing tour.

Little by little, Ms. Heffner took a bigger advisory role in Miss Duke's
finances, Miss Duke's associates said. In 1987, she persuaded the heiress to
dismiss her business manager and hire Irwin Bloom, a New York accountant. That
year Miss Duke signed a will making Ms. Heffner executor. In 1988, the heiress
adopted her as her only heir.

But the relationship between the women began to sour a year later when Ms.
Heffner became romantically involved with one of Miss Duke's bodyguards, James
Burns.  "Chandi's loyalty became divided and Doris could never stand that," said
Liz McConville, who served as Miss Duke's secretary for 18 years. "She had
bought and paid for Chandi 100 percent."

Soon Ms. Heffner began to alienate many servants, including Mr. Lafferty, with
bossy demands, some of Miss Duke's associates say. "The day after the adoption
she changed and became the little tyrant she really is," said Colin Shanley, who
said he quit as Miss Duke's cook in 1989 because of Ms. Heffner. He and Ann
Bostich, a housekeeper for Miss Duke in Beverly Hills from 1989 until her death,
have sued the estate, charging breach of contract.

By February 1991, Miss Duke's disenchantment with Ms. Heffner peaked. She
ordered her lawyer to tell Ms. Heffner to get out. They never saw each other
again.

Ms. Heffner declined a request to be interviewed for this article. After suing
three times, she reached a $65 million settlement with the Duke Estate last
month. Part of the agreement is that she not talk about Miss Duke's life, her
lawyers said.

Staff
Ex-Servants Accuse a Butler

Mr. Shanley, the cook, came back to work for Miss Duke in March 1991; he says he
hardly recognized her. In 1989, she had been a vibrant older woman who swam laps
every day, but now she looked emaciated and pale. Miss Duke told him she
believed Ms. Heffner had poisoned her.

"She was frail, very frail," Mr. Shanley said in a recent interview.

Mr. Lafferty's role also changed after the falling out between Miss Duke and Ms.
Heffner, Mr. Shanley and Ms. Bostich said. Before 1991, he had been a
traditional butler, serving tea and answering doors. Now, they said, he gave
orders to the staff and often said he spoke for Miss Duke.

Mr. Shanley said Mr. Lafferty began to isolate Miss Duke. He intercepted her
calls, and friends and relatives said in interviews and affidavits that it
became nearly impossible to reach her on the telephone.

"He made it clear that everyone had to go through him first to speak to Miss
Duke about anything," Mr. Shanley said.

Mr. Lafferty declined a request to be interviewed for this article. In
affidavits, he has denied having exerted any influence on Miss Duke's decisions.

Over the next 12 months, Miss Duke changed her will three times, court papers
say. After meeting several times in the spring of 1991 with Dr. Harry B.
Demopoulos, a diet specialist from Scarsdale, N.Y., who had treated her for a
decade, she hired the law firm that represented the doctor and signed a new
codicil naming him and Chemical Bank as co-executors. Dr. Demopoulos and the
bank were to get $25 million each.

"She was definitely motivated by a fear that Chandi or Burns were going to harm
her," recalled Suzelle Smith, a lawyer for Dr. Demopoulos. Miss Duke went so far
as to have tests run on the food and sherry at Shangri-La, her house on the
coast of Oahu, she said. No poison was found.

In November 1991, Miss Duke had a new will drafted that made Mr. Bloom, the
accountant, the executor. After a trip to Vietnam and Thailand in April, 1992,
she changed course again, signing another codicil that made Mr. Lafferty
co-executor along with Walker Inman, her half-nephew and closest relative. She
confided to friends during the trip that she no longer trusted Mr. Bloom, court
papers say.

Health
Spending Sprees And Operations

Miss Duke's medical disasters started in April 1992, when she decided to have a
facelift and asked her servants to seek out Dr. Harry A. Glassman, a well-known
Hollywood surgeon. Two days after the operation in his office, she fell out of
bed and broke her hip, her employees said. She was taken to Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center in Los Angeles, where Dr. Glassman recommended she seek treatment from
Dr. Kivowitz and an orthopedic surgeon, Barry M. Braiker.

That summer while she recovered, Dr. Kivowitz and Dr. Glassman started visiting
her frequently at home, Ms. Bostich and Mr. Shanley said. The cook said the two
doctors would arrive in the late afternoon and drink $100 bottles of Louis
Roederer Cristal champagne with Miss Duke. She grew especially fond of Dr.
Glassman, her friends said.

Sometime that fall, Miss Duke decided to have her arthritic knees replaced with
artificial joints. She told friends she wanted to dance again. The surgery was
done in January 1993, and Miss Duke went to Shangri-La, in Hawaii, to recover.

Mr. Shanley said Miss Duke "did not know where she was or what day it was" while
they were in Hawaii. She took strong narcotics for pain -- Percodan and Demerol
-- plus several sleeping medicines and anti-depressants, court papers said. She
also drank wine daily, and took laxatives to stay thin, her servants said.

By late February, she had become so malnourished and dehydrated that her life
was in danger, court papers say. She flew back to Los Angeles and was admitted
to Cedars-Sinai.

Her nurses noted she was intermittently disoriented and confused, sometimes
hallucinating that she was in a noisy apartment in Brooklyn.

A staff neurologist, Dr. Clarke D. Espy, examined her on March 2 and said in his
report that she suffered from a mild delirium "possibly exacerbated" by
prescription drugs. He said later in an affidavit that once she was taken off
certain medications, her mental state improved. Hospital records for the days on
which she later signed documents suggest she was alert and oriented.

Whatever her mental state, in early March Ms. Duke called Angier Biddle Duke,
her cousin and a former ambassador, and asked if he could recommend a lawyer.
(Mr. Duke died three weeks ago.)

She also asked her plastic surgeon, Dr. Glassman, to put her in touch with Alan
Croll, a neighbor of his. Mr. Croll referred her to William M. Doyle Jr., one of
his partners in the Katten, Muchin firm. Mr. Doyle, their leading estate
specialist, flew from Chicago to Los Angeles the next day.

"The only change she was making was to replace Irwin Bloom with Bernard
Lafferty," Mr. Doyle said. "She said Mr. Bloom had lost his sense of territory
and had violated the cardinal sin of somehow thinking that he had become Mr.
Duke."

Mr. Doyle said he proposed other trustees and pointed out Mr. Lafferty's lack of
education. "She told me that he wasn't college educated, but nor was she," Mr.
Doyle recalled. "He had been by her side 24 hours a day for six years. He was
intimately familiar with her view of life."

On March 9, 1993, Miss Duke signed the codicil, so weak that Mr. Doyle had to
guide her hand, witnesses said. Mr. Doyle said he knew the will would be
challenged. "It was clear she was disinheriting her daughter," he said. "Any
third grader would realize this was going to be a contested estate."

The Last Months
No Extra Measure To Sustain Life

The months that followed her release from the hospital on April 15, 1993, were
hard for her, her employees said. She was often forgetful and disoriented, and
still had problems with her artificial knees. She made short trips to Hawaii and
New Jersey before returning to Los Angeles to have another knee operation in
July.

Dr. Kivowitz said in court papers that he advised her against the operation. So
did Eleanor Lawson, her longtime friend and dance teacher. But Miss Duke
insisted. Two days after she went home from the hospital, she had a stroke and
nearly died.

She returned to Cedars-Sinai, where she stayed two months before being sent home
on Sept. 20, for the last time.

Her bedroom was converted for intensive care, with two nurses on duty round the
clock. She had a stomach tube for feeding and a tracheotomy tube for breathing.

On Oct. 7, Dr. Kivowitz said in court papers, Miss Duke told him that she did
not want to go on living if her health could not improve. The next day, he
ordered nurses to take no special measures to keep her alive.

From that point, Miss Duke was heavily sedated, the nurses' notes and court
documents say. On Oct. 18, a nurse noted that Miss Duke had told her: "I want to
die."

During this time, Mr. Lafferty was running up Miss Duke's credit card accounts,
court records show, spending lavishly on gifts for nurses and, in October 1993
alone, buying $20,000 worth of clothes.

Mr. Lafferty and Miss Duke's business manager, George Reed, also doled out
several large gifts to the doctors and to charity in the month before Miss Duke
died, saying they had been authorized by Miss Duke, the records show. Dr.
Glassman received $500,000, and Dr. Kivowitz got $10,000 in addition to his
fees.

On Oct. 26, Dr. Kivowitz stopped Miss Duke's feedings and oxygen.

On Oct. 27, Dr. Kivowitz, Dr. Glassman and Mr. Doyle all visited the Beverly
Hills house. Mr. Shanley said that when a package of medication arrived in the
kitchen that afternoon, Mr. Lafferty grabbed it from him, saying: "Miss Duke is
going to die tonight."

At 4 P.M. on the 27th, Dr. Kivowitz ordered her to receive a morphine drip,
starting at 5 milligrams. His order said to increase the flow 1 milligram an
hour as needed.

But for some reason, the dosage of morphine was increased to 10 milligrams per
hour at 6:30 P.M., then 15 milligrams at 7:30, and finally, at 4 A.M., to 25
milligrams, according to the nurses' notes. Dr. Kivowitz also gave her an
additional injection of 10 milligrams before he went home for the night, the
records show.

The drug slowed her breathing. Her lungs filled with fluid. At 5:15 A.M. on Oct.
28, her nurses gave her an injection of 100 milligrams of Demerol. Their notes
indicate Dr. Glassman ordered the extra painkiller over the telephone at the
request of Dr. Kivowitz. At 5:48 A.M., Miss Duke stopped breathing.

Mr. Lafferty and Mr. Doyle were at her bedside. Soon afterward, Dr. Kivowitz's
partner, Dr. Joshua Trabulus, signed a death certificate, saying the cause was
fluid in the lungs and infection. A few hours later, the butler and the lawyer
took the body to Westwood mortuary for cremation.


NAME: Doris Duke

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 22, 1995, Monday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error an article yesterday about the dispute over Doris
Duke's estate misstated in some some editions the year for her adoption of
Chandi Heffner. It was 1988, not 1958.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Doris Duke with her husband, James H. R. Cromwell, after their
arrival on a honeymoon trip in 1935 at the Karachi Airport, then in India. (The
New York Times, 1935); Doris Duke on a Manhattan sidewalk in 1989, four years
before her death. (Bill Cunningham, 1989) (pg. 41)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tragic Blunders

SECTION: Section 7; Page 47; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


To the Editor:

Max Frankel's review of Robert S. McNamara's "In Retrospect: The Tragedy and
Lessons of Vietnam" (April 16) adds thoughtfully to the growing debate on the
value of our former Defense Secretary's mea culpa three decades after the fact.
As a Vietnam veteran who was a college student in the 1960's, I have some
context for coming to grips with the fact that many of the early decisions our
leaders made were based on a now discredited notion: the domino theory.

The cleavages in our country will probably prevent us from ever fully developing
(outside of fiction and poetry) the truths of the Vietnam War. We can argue
again and again whether the war was ultimately winnable or whether the costs
were justified. But there is a fundamental flaw in the war scenario that Mr.
Frankel does not address. Our leaders, whether acting with integrity, cynicism
or both, were making decisions about the fate of the underclass, which actually
fought the war.

Mr. Frankel tells us of "Mr. Mc Namara's unwillingness to explore the human
tragedies and political legacies of this longest American war. What was it like
to send tens of thousands to their deaths in an increasingly dubious cause?" It
was not old men sending their sons into battle. Instead, with notable
exceptions, our leaders were spared the pain and horror of losing sons,
daughters, nephews, nieces or even neighbors.

A recent cartoon by Paul Conrad of The Los Angeles Times, which depicts Mr.
McNamara saying "Sorry about that" to the names on the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial, is particularly poignant because it reminds us that he is speaking to
somebody else, somebody outside his circle. In simplest terms, he's talking to
the faceless "them."

A fundamental imperative of war is that leaders who ask others to die should
have a personal stake in the grief that they create. Since this was not the case
with Vietnam, the debate and almost everything else about this war will continue
to reflect two cultures.

I'm glad Mr. McNamara is providing fresh historical insights. As for his
feelings of guilt, "Sorry about that."

E. MICHAEL GOODKIND
Menlo Park, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tragic Blunders

SECTION: Section 7; Page 47; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 131 words


To the Editor:

Americans come by their cynicism honestly. Robert McNamara's mea culpa leaves a
strangely hollow feeling. How does one contemplate behavior leading to the
humiliation and attempted destruction of whole cultures? Tepid public contrition
does not account for and cannot balance the grief and pain of the multitude who
suffered from American flame and fire. That will take more than one lifetime.

Hannah Arendt was not right. Banality masks a deeper reality. It is time to
begin thinking about the energy and inspiration of evil. We need to reflect on
thought systems and accompanying behavior that in themselves can lead only to
pain and cynicism. We must return to the idealism that made us a great people
and nation.

DUDLEY BENNETT
West Caldwell, N.J.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tragic Blunders

SECTION: Section 7; Page 47; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 219 words


To the Editor:

Max Frankel writes: "By delaying his war memoir so long, Mr. McNamara has
greatly compounded the difficulty of his mission. . . . No one under the age of
50 can be expected to fathom the fears and phobias of the 1960's to which he
rightly ascribes the Indochina disaster."

Mr. Frankel is strangely antihistorical. I can easily imagine someone under 70
being able to fathom, through reading and empathy, the emotions connected with
our immigration policy toward Jews during the years of Nazi terror. The cruel
stinginess of that policy could be better understood if an old State Department
hand now made public the details of his role as one of its architects. Such an
account might illuminate, among other things, how governmental and public
anti-Semitism resulted in American complicity in Nazi barbarities.

Robert McNamara has done what few, if any, major officials, in or out of office,
have done. However belatedly, he has detailed and mourned many of his tragic
blunders. I hope the often hostile and, worse, patronizing reaction to his
account does not teach us another lesson: Never acknowledge your errors, regrets
or sins, lest you be attacked for not apologizing enough or for acknowledging
the wrong sins or for revealing them too late.

MYRON R. SHARAF
Newton, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Les Aspin, 56, Dies; Member of Congress And Defense Chief

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1614 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


Les Aspin, a Democratic representative from Wisconsin for 22 years and Secretary
of Defense in the first 11 months of the Clinton Administration, died tonight at
Georgetown University Medical Center.

He was 56 and suffered a stroke on Saturday.

Michael Tebo, a spokesman for the medical center, said Mr. Aspin died at 7:55
P.M. He said that Mr. Aspin was "lucid, awake and speaking" when he was admitted
to the hospital at 9:30 A.M. on Saturday but that "despite intensive medical
intervention over the next 34 hours his medical condition continued to
deteriorate."

Mr. Aspin had a history of problems with his circulatory system. He was
hospitalized in March 1993 after complaining of shortness of breath, and a
pacemaker was inserted then to regulate his heart's rhythm.

Mr. Aspin was elected to Congress in 1970 in large part because of his
opposition to the war in Vietnam, and in his early years in Congress he was an
outspoken critic of the Pentagon.

But his views shifted after he became chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee in 1985. He endorsed much of the military build-up under President
Ronald Reagan and was a strong supporter of the war against Iraq under President
George Bush.

As Secretary of Defense, Mr. Aspin was involved in some of the toughest
international and domestic policy matters faced by the Clinton Administration in
its first year. By the end of the year, he was viewed by the White House as
indecisive and basically a disappointment. He would probably have been forced
from office had he not resigned in December 1993.

He had been working this year as chairman of a Presidential commission charged
with reviewing the operations of the nation's intelligence services,
particularly the Central Intelligence Agency.

In a statement issued by the White House tonight, President Clinton said Mr.
Aspin "rendered our nation extraordinary, selfless service."

"I speak for millions of Americans when mourning the death today of Les Aspin
and join many others in saying that he was my friend," Mr. Clinton said. "Les
Aspin accomplished greatly because he cared greatly."

John M. Deutch, the Director of Central Intelligence and a friend of Mr. Aspin's
for 30 years, said he had lunch with him last Friday at the C.I.A.

"He seemed marvelous," said Mr. Deutch, who was the best man at Mr. Aspin's
wedding. He said he and Mr. Aspin, who was instrumental in the selection of Mr.
Deutch to head the C.I.A., "were scheming on how to reform the intelligence
agency."

Defense Secretary William J. Perry, who was Mr. Aspin's deputy at the Pentagon
before replacing him, called Mr. Aspin's death "a loss to the nation, a loss to
the men and women of the U.S. military and a loss to me personally."

Leslie Aspin Jr. was born on July 21, 1938, in Milwaukee. His father, who died
young of heart disease, was from Yorkshire, England, and immigrated to the
United States by way of Canada.

Mr. Aspin earned an undergraduate degree from Yale University, a master's degree
from Oxford University and a doctorate in economics from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. In the 1960's, he performed his military service as an
economist at the Pentagon under Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara.

After his military service, he worked briefly on the staff of Senator William
Proxmire, a Democrat from Wisconsin, and then returned to Wisconsin to enter
politics and teach economics at Marquette University. In 1970, at the age of 32,
he was elected to the House from a district in southeastern Wisconsin on a
platform that stressed his opposition to the war in Vietnam and his advocacy of
environmental regulations.

Robert W. Kastenmeier, a Democrat who served for 20 years with Mr. Aspin in the
state's Congressional delegation, said that Mr. Aspin was an energetic
politician who took a district "where it was hard to get elected as a Democrat,
and he made it his own."

In Congress, Mr. Aspin was appointed to the Armed Services Committee and
immediately began to attack the close relationship between senior lawmakers and
the Pentagon.

Week after week, he issued news releases exposing what he believed to be
wasteful Pentagon spending. He criticized a wide range of practices, including
poison gas experiments, expensive uniforms for officers, cost overruns in
shipbuilding and the care of officers' pets at Government expense. He was also
at the forefront of various antiwar efforts in Congress.

At the time, he explained himself this way to a reporter: "You're a junior
member of a committee, and you don't have the leverage of a subcommittee or
committee chairman, so what do you do?"

In his first years in the House, he was almost constantly at war with F. Edward
Hebert, the crusty, hawkish Louisiana Democrat who was then chairman of the
Armed Services Committee. In 1975, in one of the first breaks with the practice
of selecting chairmen strictly by seniority, Mr. Hebert was ousted by Democrats
in the House and replaced with a more malleable chairman, Melvin Price of
Illinois. Mr. Aspin was one of the leaders of the uprising.

In the years that followed, Mr. Aspin became less of a gadfly and more of a
serious student of the military. By 1985, he was recognized as a leading
Congressional authority on Pentagon policy. Then, he organized another coup,
driving Mr. Price from his chairmanship and leapfrogging over more senior
members to become chairman himself.

By this time, his politics had changed, to the dismay of the liberal wing in his
party. He urged fellow Democrats to shed the party's dovish image.

On one of the most divisive policy matters of the time, he supported the
development of the multi-warhead MX missile, which many liberals thought was too
expensive and disruptive of the relationship between the United States and the
Soviet Union.

On another controversy, he defended United States support of the contras, who
were trying to overthrow the communist government of Nicaragua.

In 1987, an unusual coalition of liberal and conservative Democrats tried to
strip Mr. Aspin of the chairmanship, but he narrowly survived the challenge.

Four years later, Mr. Aspin argued vigorously in favor of the Bush
Administration's policies in the Persian Gulf. Four days before the House voted
to authorize the use of military force against Iraq, he wrote a report that many
of his colleagues saw as callous. One sentence read: "I believe prospects are
high for a rapid victory with light to moderate American casualties, perhaps
three to five thousand including 500 to 1,000 dead."

In 1992, along with Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, chairman of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, Mr. Aspin was a chief adviser on military policy to Bill
Clinton's Presidential campaign. His selection as Secretary of Defense in
December 1992 was generally praised, although some military experts pointed out
that he had no experience managing a large organization like the Pentagon.

Mr. Aspin took control of the Pentagon at a time of tremendous upheaval in the
post-cold-war world and in the Pentagon itself. Eager to take on the country's
shifting international commitments, Mr. Aspin hired mostly academic experts as
his main advisers.

He was never as close to President Clinton as Secretary of State Warren
Christopher and the national security adviser, Anthony Lake. And he disagreed
with the all-or-nothing approach to military engagement of Gen. Colin L. Powell,
then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Mr. Aspin held that the United States should be prepared to use troops
selectively to buttress its diplomacy. In this vein, he suggested that the use
of force in Bosnia might be appropriate.

In retrospect, his limited management ability can be seen to have hurt him as
Defense Secretary. He tried, sometimes awkwardly, to mediate the prolonged fight
between the White House and the military brass over whether to allow homosexuals
to serve in the armed forces. He was also widely criticized for deciding not to
reinforce American troops in Somalia in the weeks before 18 American soldiers
died in a disastrous raid.

He sought to articulate a new vision of what the structure of the military
should be. But in an Administration not known for its decisiveness, he often
seemed unable to close a discussion and reach a decision.

At the end of his tenure, he was deep in battle with the Office of Management
and Budget, which wanted to reduce military spending more than Mr. Aspin's plan
to remake the Defense Department's long-range war-fighting strategy could stand.
The only way Mr. Clinton could have sided with Mr. Aspin would have been to take
money away from domestic programs to spend on the military, a step the President
was unlikely to take.

Mr. Aspin was the first Clinton Cabinet member to leave, and Mr. Clinton took
pains to portray the resignation as Mr. Aspin's decision. But few doubted at the
time that he would have been dropped had he not resigned.

Mr. Aspin was a tall, stoop-shouldered, rumpled figure with thick glasses who
began to go bald and gray at a young age. He was divorced in 1979, had no
children and never remarried. He periodically entertained at his home in
Georgetown, but basically his life was his work.

"Obviously, he was a person who took his job very, very seriously," said
Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, who served with him on
the Armed Services Committee. "He was totally wedded to his job 24 hours a day,
to the point where he probably sacrificed some of his personal life."

Ms. Schroeder said she often felt that his best friend was his sheepdog, Junket,
who often accompanied him to work, and she described that as "very sad."

NAME: Les Aspin

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Les Aspin in 1993, the year he resigned as Secretary of Defense.
(Paul Conklin)(pg. B10)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

PULSE;
Planning for Memorial Day

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 170 words


On May 29, the United States will observe its 41st Memorial Day. Before 1954,
the holiday was called Decoration Day, when the graves of Civil War veterans
were decorated. This year marks the 50th anniversary of the end of World War II,
as well as the 20th anniversary of the end of the Vietnam War. Of the nation's
26 million veterans, 2 million are residents of the metropolitan area.

IN CONNECTICUT
A memorial service to honor those who died and fought on Iwo Jima during World
War II begins at noon on May 29 at the Iwo Jima Monument in Newington.

NEW JERSEY
Vietnam veterans were honored on May 7, with the opening of the New Jersey
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Holmdel. Though there are no special services
planned for Memorial Day, the monument is open 24 hours a day, seven days a
week.

NEW YORK
The Albany County Memorial Day Parade will begin at 9:30 A.M. and a service will
be held at 11 A.M. at the steps of the State Capitol across the street from the
Vietnam and Korean War memorials.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Planning for Memorial Day" shows deaths from World Wars I and
II, the Korean War, the vietnam War and the Gulf War for N.J., N.Y. and Conn.
(Sources: Capitol Veterans Affairs Offices in Connecticut, New York and New
Jersey, Library of Congress, Center for Electronic Research, Department of
Defense)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Patents;
An Injury-Alert System Would Mute Loud Television During Emergency Conversions
With the Elderly

BYLINE: By Sabra Chartrand

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


NEARLY half a million Americans carry personal emergency systems: beeper-like
devices that elderly people can wear if a fall or other problem prevents them
from calling for help on a telephone. If injured, a button can be pushed on a
wireless radio transmitter that is worn like a necklace or wristwatch.

When the systems were first offered, in the 1970's, they worked as a one-way
alert sent to an emergency service. Now, more advanced units use a receiver
attached to the person's telephone that picks up the distress signal,
automatically dials the emergency service, sends an identification code and then
transforms the telephone into a speaker phone so emergency personnel can talk to
the elderly victim.

But sometimes that is difficult because of background noise. L. Dennis Shapiro,
an electrical engineer and chairman of Lifeline Systems Inc., in Cambridge,
Mass., first noticed the problem when meeting customers who use his company's
personal emergency equipment.

"When I visit the homes of elderly people, they almost always have a television
set on," Mr. Shapiro said. "And typically when the TV is on, it's loud because
the average age of our subscribers is over 75 and the majority have a hearing
problem."

Mr. Shapiro worried that loud televisions would make it impossible to hold a
conversation over a speaker phone. So he patented a personal emergency device
that mutes the television volume.

"It's set up to learn the particular muting code of the TV," he explained. "It
has a learning circuit inside. You take the TV remote, press the mute button and
it acts just like a TV. It receives the digital sequence of ons and offs of the
infrared light bulb. It learns them and can mimic them."

A microphone is installed in the radio receiver attached to the subscriber's
telephone. If an elderly person is injured and presses the emergency button, the
signal causes the phone to dial a monitoring station. At the same time, the
microphone receives a sample of ambient room noise. If the noise registers above
a certain level, the television mute function of the emergency device is
activated.

The television silencer is just one of Mr. Shapiro's patents in emergency
communications.

"My orientation has been to provide communication to at-risk people, especially
the elderly who cannot manage for themselves if there is a personal problem or
an environmental problem," he said.

He holds a patent for including a radio receiver in the emergency device the
elderly wear. In case of a hurricane, he imagines, if electricity and telephones
are out of order, the wearer can still hear emergency broadcasts. Another patent
allows an older person to press the device's button to turn a ringing telephone
into a speaker phone, so that the answerer does not have to get up.

Mr. Shapiro went into emergency communications after designing radar systems for
the military during the Vietnam War. After the war, he used that technology to
create motion detectors for alarm systems. Then he became interested in personal
alert devices.

"This is a real swords-to-plowshares type of story," he said. In the United
States and Canada, Lifeline Systems has 100,000 direct subscribers, who are
monitored at the company's headquarters, and nearly 300,000 indirect customers
who use Lifeline equipment but are monitored by hospitals. About 25 percent of
those have the two-way voice system. His company's service costs about $1 a day,
Mr. Shapiro said. Other, smaller companies provide similar services.

Mr. Shapiro said his patent for television-muting technology could be adapted to
silence radios, stereos or tape players. And he says it might be useful for
automatically muting the television when a phone or doorbell rings in the home
of someone who is hard of hearing.

Lifeline Systems is not yet selling personal emergency systems with
television-muting capability, and Mr. Shapiro is unsure when the service will be
available. He holds patent 5,420,907.

Food Container Lid That Pumps Out Air

More help for the elderly and others with limited physical strength or
disabilities may come from a newly patented lid for food containers. Eric
Miramon designed a lid with a mini-pump that extracts air from a container in
place of the manual technique of gripping the bowl and pushing down on the lid
while pulling up on a corner to force air out.

"The basic lid is about the same size, diameter and depth as a mayonnaise-jar
lid," said Jeff Stuebing, a partner with Mr. Miramon in Invental Laboratories
Inc. The company, in Morro Bay, Calif., can make the lids in any size.

"But where normally there is air space on the inside of a normal lid, we
incorporated a bellows connected to a small valve," he explained. The lid has a
textured, rectangular-shaped button on top that activates the bellows.

"When you push the bellows down, the air is expelled through the small valve
into the atmosphere," he continued. "When you let go, the bellows has resiliency
and returns to its original shape, sucking the air out of the container."

There is another, smaller button on the side of the lid that releases air back
into the container to make it easy to break the vacuum seal and open the jar.
Mr. Stuebing said pressing the buttons took little strength. Ordinary jars,
containers and leftover dishes require only one push of the bellows button to
expel the air.

"If you had a five-gallon bucket or ice chest for keeping picnic food cold
longer, you'd have to actuate the bellows five or six times," he said.

Mr. Miramon and Mr. Stuebing said the lid was designed to fit standard leftover
storage containers like Tupperware and Rubbermaid products. They are also
designing a five-gallon bucket for restaurant use and have approached
manufacturers of picnic coolers about designing an ice chest. They also said
they thought their patent could be used for air-tight storage of medical or
pharmaceutical products. Mr. Miramon received patent 5,406,992.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
We Have Met the Future, Uneasily

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 954 words



1939
The Lost World of the Fair
By David Gelernter
Illustrated. 418 pages. Free Press. $23.

Considering that the 1939 New York World's Fair envisioned a future of cars,
superhighways and technological triumph, one can understand why a contemporary
observer might not look back at the event with feelings of nostalgia. Yet that
is exactly what David Gelernter does in his new book, "1939: The Lost World of
the Fair," which is part fiction, part history, part sociology and part
prophecy.

He argues that in certain respects the time of the fair was a better one than
today and that part of what we have lost in the meantime is the vision that
inspired the fair. What we have lost, he writes, is the optimism that the fair
embodied, even at a time when the American economy had barely started up again
and Europe was facing catastrophic war. As the fictional Hattie Levine puts it
in an imagined interview with the narrator: "The fair had a remarkable mood and
feel to it. At least for us. It was an air of . . . . I don't want to lapse into
rosy romanticism. I'm skeptical of it. But what I want to say is, acute hope."

The fictional parts of "1939" are a surprise coming from Mr. Gelernter, a
professor of computer science at Yale University and the author of two previous
books, "Mirror Worlds: Or the Day Software Puts the Universe in a Shoebox," and
"The Muse in the Machine." They are built out of conversations with Mrs. Levine,
who is obviously a composite of actual people who recall the fair, and out of
selections from a diary the author invents for her. The novel within "1939"
serves the useful purpose of giving us a spectator's view of a day at the fair,
from a ride through General Motors' Futurama, one of the fair's great hits, to a
parachute jump on the machine that today stands useless at Coney Island.

But the story that Mrs. Levine tells is highly predictable and wastes far too
much space rather heavy-handedly underlining the author's theories, mainly
through an endless discussion between a younger version of Mrs. Levine and her
fiance-to-be over whether to bring children into a world about to go to war.
Mrs. Levine's outlook is far better dramatized in E. L. Doctorow's novel
"World's Fair," a book that Mr. Gelernter never acknowledges, even in his
lengthy bibliography, although he mentions Mr. Doctorow in another context.

Mr. Gelernter's points are also far better made in the nonfiction parts of his
book. Here he argues that the technological vision that informed the fair
amounted to a "civic religion" that "made eschatological predictions: It
promised a utopian future to believers, in the end of days." The author
continues: "And then an amazing thing happened -- a thing without parallel, so
far as I know, in the whole history of religion: In the years following the
Second World War, those utopian promises came true."

Americans got the cars, the highways and the suburban homes equipped with
gadgetry that the fair promised, the author contends.  Americans became richer,
better fed, more in command of their world.  "It's not utopia, we point out,
it's just suburbia," writes Mr. Gelernter, imagining a dialogue between today
and 1939. "But that is what we longed for, says 1939, and you have got it.
Promise made, promise kept."

Yet having achieved the dream, people lost the vision, the author says. Having
entered the future, they lost a view of the future. This explains why in a
better time, we feel worse. "When a person loses his religious faith, it is not
that God's character seems to change; God disappears," Mr. Gelernter writes.
"Religion is above all a matter of seeing. . . . Today, by dint of achieving the
utopian future, we have lost our faith and see nothing."

All of which makes sense, so far as it goes. Yet somehow it also leaves
everything out. Mr. Gelernter mentions the Vietnam War as a possible source of
contemporary disillusionment; "also rock music and drugs and things like that."
He adds that "a change as deep as the one we experienced ought not to happen
merely on the basis of external events." Yet he never touches on certain more
significant events.

He mentions bombing and Guernica, but never the bomb that high technology
produced. He insists that people in the 1930's were sensitive to nature, but he
never brings up what uncontrolled technology, particularly involving cars, has
done to the environment. He writes that "the search for bigger and better
Frankensteins has gone forward," without seeming to be aware of the negative
import of Mary Shelley's invention.  In short, he never acknowledges any of the
deeper causes of the loss of faith in technology. He merely asserts that we're
unhappy because our dreams have come true.

Still, if "1939" is weak on the woes of the present, it is strong on the
pleasures of the past. Through the eyes of Mr. Gelernter's fictional witness,
the reader can sense the wonder of the fair. "When it is almost nine we walk
(just as everyone else is walking) towards the Lagoon of Nations & the display
there is indescribable," the younger Hattie records in her diary. "At the
climax, everything is turned off at once, lights, fountains, flame & music --
the waters crash back into the pool with the roar of a breaker driving into a
cliff, & the sudden black is immense & a little frightening & incomparably
dramatic. For a few moments no one moves. The show is amazing. And it recalls
many other things at this Fair in being simply unlike anything you have ever
seen before."

"I have seen the future," declared the buttons that people received at the end
of the Futurama ride. And for a while you share Mr. Gelernter's longing for a
time when that future was good.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Gelernter (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
Hong Kong Vietnamese Are Moved to New Camp

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 126 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, May 21


The police transferred all but a handful of a resisting group of Vietnamese boat
people from a violence-stricken detention center today.

Only 40 women and children remained from the group scheduled for transfer to
another camp. They will be transported separately, a Government spokesman said.

In stark contrast to the scenes of mayhem and bloodshed on Saturday when the
transfer effort began, the operation today passed uneventfully.

Almost 200 people, mostly police officers, were injured on Saturday when 1,300
Vietnamese resisted transfer to another camp.

Around 22,000 Vietnamese are incarcerated in Hong Kong. They are classified as
economic migrants and are ineligible for refugee status. Hong Kong says they
must return to Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Vision of an Apocalypse: The Religion of the Far Right

BYLINE: By GUSTAV NIEBUHR

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words

DATELINE: MULDROW, Okla., May 15


Six miles up a dirt road that rolls and dips through field and forest, Robert G.
Millar presides over a religious community whose partially Hebrew name means
City of God. There he proclaims a devastating vision of America's future.

"We're going to have civil war and race riots," said Mr. Millar, reclining
shoeless on a sofa in a comfortably furnished house trailer, a nearby window
open to breezes and bird song. But his apocalypse includes a promise of
salvation: God will insure that some survive to see a better world.

Compact in build, silver-haired and dressed for an interview in a clergyman's
black shirt and white collar, Mr. Millar, 69, is founder of the community,
Elohim City, a settlement on a wooded hillside, home to something less than 100
people who call him Grandpa and share a belief that whites of northern European
extraction, rather than Jews, are God's chosen people.

Called Christian Identity, it is a belief whose roots go back a century but
which has been spreading among far right-wing groups, like Ku Klux Klan
factions, providing pseudo-theological grounds for virulently racist and
anti-Semitic views, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith says. In Identity
literature, Jews are Satan's children and blacks subhuman.

"There are groups in all regions of the country, little Identity churches," said
Thomas Halpern, associate director of the league's fact-finding department. The
number of believers is not known, Mr. Halpern said.

Mr. Millar was cautious in discussing Identity's racial outlook. Elohim City was
"not pro-Zionist," he said. But he said that Israel was "founded on terrorism,"
and that he believed that Federal officials who arrested another Identity
leader, James Ellison, in 1985, were accompanied by two agents of the Mossad,
the Israeli intelligence agency.

Mr. Millar described himself as a spiritual adviser, or pastor, to Mr. Ellison,
negotiating his surrender to Federal authorities. Mr. Ellison has since
completed a prison term on racketeering and weapons charges. Before his arrest,
Mr. Ellison was head of a now-defunct Identity community, the Covenant, Sword
and Arm of the Lord, in northwestern Arkansas, which itself warned of an
apocalypse and offered members what it called survival training in shooting and
wilderness skills. Mr. Millar was also spiritual adviser to the white
supremacist Richard W. Snell, who was executed in Arkansas on April 19 (the day
the Federal Building in Oklahoma City was bombed) for shooting down a state
trooper. Mr. Millar visited the condemned man, witnessed his execution and
buried him at Elohim City.

Despite its grand name, Mr. Millar's community more closely resembles a small
village, a few trailers on concrete slabs and some slightly larger buildings
with stone foundations, including a round-roofed structure that serves as a
church.

Inside the building, under a blue-painted ceiling, on a carpeted stage, facing a
triple row of theater seats, daily services are held.

At the community's entrance, a small sign tacked to a tree directs newcomers to
a parking area, where a visitor was met by two "security officers," young men in
camouflage trousers and lace-up boots, who served as escorts. One carried a
holstered pistol.

But the atmosphere inside the trailer was relaxed. Mr. Millar introduced the
home's owner, Lessie Tucker, a warm-humored, older woman, and Zera Patterson, a
muscular man with a goatee who said he served in the Marine Corps during the
Vietnam War, had undergone a spiritual transformation on the journey home and
had been with Mr. Millar for 24 years.

Both sat listening as Mr. Millar spoke, although once, at his urging, Ms. Tucker
sang a song written by Elohim City residents about faith in God. The community,
she said, also had a song honoring Mr. Millar, titled, "Here Comes Grandpa,
Marching Throughout the Land."

In the interview, Mr. Millar alternated between expressing deep foreboding and
declaring his community's peaceful intent. "We're not doing anything illegal,"
he said. "We don't have an illegal gun. But neither was Randy Weaver doing
anything illegal when they shot his wife and boy." He was referring to a
confrontation in 1992 between Mr. Weaver and Federal agents at Ruby Ridge,
Idaho, in which a deputy marshall also died. The incident, like the siege at the
Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., has become a rallying cry for
anti-Government militants.

Voicing convictions oft-heard in right-wing circles, Mr. Millar said that
Federal agencies like the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms were out of
control, that America was at risk of foreign intervention, most likely by United
Nations troops.

He also asserted that the press was manipulated by the Government.

He also said Elohim City was under surveillance. "We had a black helicopter
sitting about 50 feet over that tree," he said. "It was a Sunday morning about
three weeks ago."

Local law-enforcement officials say they know nothing about that. "We get along
with them fine, at the local level," said Jack Goss, an investigator for
District Attorney Nathan Morton, whose jurisdiction includes Adair County, where
Elohim City is located.

And as a religious body, Elohim City seems little known among local clergy. The
Rev. Bill Cheyne, pastor of First United Methodist Church in Siloam Springs,
Ark., up State Highway 59, said, "I guess they pretty much keep to themselves."

Mr. Millar said he was once a Mennonite, but had renounced the pacifism that
distinguished that branch of Protestantism.

He founded Elohim City 22 years ago, believing himself divinely led to the site.
But it was earlier, in his native Canada in 1948, that he said he had a
life-changing spiritual experience, with riveting visions of world events like
the widespread, bloody rioting that accompanied India's independence that year.
"I saw it as if I was looking at a movie screen," he said.

He also saw vast destruction in the United States. "I saw missiles coming out of
the water before there were any Polaris submarines," he said.

The community has its own school. "They teach them everything that other
children learn," said George Eaton, a neighbor who publishes a right-wing
newsletter called The Patriot Report and who recalled watching Mr. Millar teach
mathematics, working God into an equation. "They try to live a real Christian
life style up there."

But Elohim City's Christianity is a distinctive brand. "I believe that the
inheritors of the promises of the 12 tribes of Israel are primarily the Celtic
tribes," Mr. Millar said, "the Germanic people and the Scandinavian people, not
inclusively and not exclusively, but primarily."

He added: "This people represents 9 percent of the population of the world. They
control 50 percent of the wealth of the world. So it's evident that the promises
of God have come to pass."

Mr. Millar said he shunned the term white supremacist, but believes in racial
differences, saying that Japanese scored higher on I.Q. tests but that "the
English-speaking people" were better innovators.

Still, he said that he had "no ill will toward any people," and that whites were
divinely obliged as leaders to serve others, providing food and other aid. "I
have to be a voice for moderation, a voice for common sense," he said. "I
believe destruction is coming, but I want no part in starting it."

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert G. Millar near the entrance to Elohim City, a religious
community he founded near Muldrow, Okla., just west of Fort Smith, Ark. Mr.
Millar adheres to the Christian Identity movement. (Tom Ewart for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 985 words



International A3-11

ISRAEL HALTS LAND SEIZURES
Retreating on an issue that had put it in political peril, the Israeli
Government suspended its plans to confiscate land in largely Palestinian areas
of Jerusalem.  A1




THE NEW NOMENKLATURA
The paranoia, as well as the perks and privileges, that once characterized the
Soviet elite are making a comeback in the new Russia.A1

TALKS ON CHECHNYA
The leader of the separatist rebels in Chechnya is said to have agreed to
participate in direct peace talks with the Russian Government.  A8

NEIGHBORS OPPOSE U.S. ON CUBA
Canada and Mexico are working together to defeat proposed American legislation
that would tighten the 33-year-old trade embargo against Cuba.  A3

MEXICO'S WAR ON DRUGS
President Ernesto Zedillo has ordered the Mexican military to take a greater
role in the counternarcotics fight.  A3

RUMBLINGS IN GHANA
Although Ghana has been touted as one of Africa's economic successes, prosperity
has eluded most Ghanaians, and they appear increasingly impatient with President
Jerry Rawlings.  A6

SERB REJECTS DEAL ON SANCTIONS
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has refused to agree to an
American-backed plan that would suspend many economic sanctions against his
country in return for recognizing Bosnia.  A8

CHRISTOPHER SPEAKS OUT
Secretary of State Warren Christopher is urging President Clinton to veto a bill
in the House of Representatives that would cut foreign aid and eliminate three
foreign affairs agencies.  A9

Pullach Journal: Fury in Bavaria's beer gardens.A4

National A12-15, B8-10

COURT RULES AGAINST TERM LIMITS
The Supreme Court dealt a blow to backers of congressional term limits, ruling 5
to 4 that states cannot limit service in Congress without amending the
Constitution.  A1

RELIEF IN CONGRESS
If the court had upheld state-imposed term limits, 72 members of Congress could
not have run for re-election after next year. For now, they can run forever.  A1


POLICE MUST KNOCK, COURT SAYS
Resolving decades of debate, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the police
are ordinarily required to knock and announce their presence before entering a
home to execute a search warrant. B10

SCHOLARSHIPS FOR BLACKS LOSE
The court let stand a lower court ruling that a scholarship program for blacks
at the University of Maryland is unconstitutional. B9

PROSECUTOR FOR BOMBING CASE
The Justice Department named a Government lawyer from Illinois to head the team
that will prosecute the Oklahoma bombing case. A14

QUESTIONS ABOUT A MANUSCRIPT
A professor at Ohio State University was questioned about possessing two leaves
from a manuscript once owned by Petrarch, the 14th century Italian poet. A12

CLINTON BACKS BALANCED BUDGET
The President said explicitly for the first time that he believed a balance
budget was achievable. A13

JOCKEYING ON FISCAL MATTERS
In budget negotiations, Democratic senators tried to force Republicans into
uncomfortable votes against popular programs.  A13

CRIME REPORTS FALL AGAIN
The F.B.I. said the number of reports of serious crimes declined in 1994 for the
third straight year. But experts cautioned that it would be premature to
conclude that crime rates are really dropping. A14

TAINTED-DNA APPROACH
With questions so convoluted they left a scientist perplexed and jurors
distracted, O.J. Simpson's defense tried to show that the evidence was
contaminated. A14

RESPONSIBLE BIRTH CONTROL
A poll said that two-thirds of American men do not think they can be counted on
to choose a birth control method, and women agree.  B10

Metro Digest B1

SMALL SCHOOL, BIG MISSION
El Puente Academy, one of the city's new small, theme-oriented public schools,
views its efforts as building a model for reforming a system it finds too
unwieldy and too removed. It also wants to transform the community itself.  A1

DUKE EXECUTOR RULED UNFIT
A judge ruled that a former butler to Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress, was unfit
to be executor of her $1.2 billion estate. The judge said the butler had used
her funds to finance a "profligate life style." A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-22

The gray eminence behind classical music's stars.  C13

Dancing for a cause.  C14

CBS and Connie Chung continue negotiations.  C17

Film: To-do in Cannes over the expected X rating of "Kids." C13

Music: Bang on a Can Marathon.  C13

Books: "Temptations of a Superpower," by Ronald Steel.  C16

Television: "White Dwarf." C22

"Frontline: RosaLee's Story." C22

"Nova" on auto racing.  C22

New Fox lineup.  C22

Fashion B12

Fur tradition versus fur fun.
Science C1-11

Fossils suggest bees came millions of years before flowers.  C1

New dinosaur exhibit shows disputes among paleontologists.  C1

Techniques of molecular biology offer insight into birth defects.  C3

Study detects more weather extremes in the United States.  C4

Sports B13-18

Baseball: Mattingly and O'Neill set to return.  B15

Mets' Mlicki delivers.  B14

Basketball: Knicks must retool.  B13

Rockets stun Spurs.  B15

Columns: Anderson on Hextall.  B13

Hockey: Rangers again lose in overtime.  B13

Devils win, knot series.  B17

SportsPeople B16

Obituaries B10-11

Lee Nordness, art dealer. B11

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Crippling American science.

Albany's unsound tax cuts.

A walk to the White House.

Recognize Vietnam.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Voyage of the damned.

Russell Baker: Victory for terror.

Bob Kerrey and Alan K. Simpson:
How to save Social Security.

Chronicle B6

Chess C7

Crossword C22

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Recognize Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 343 words


Twenty years have passed since the North Vietnamese Communists won the Vietnam
War, but Washington has yet to extend full diplomatic relations to Hanoi. With
specialists satisfied that Vietnam is cooperating fully in the search for
remains of missing Americans, President Clinton should take the advice of top
aides and recognize Vietnam before 1996 election pressures encourage further
delay.

The main obstacle has been manipulation of the prisoner-of-war issue by
Republican politicians, beginning with Richard Nixon at the time of the Paris
peace accords. Last week two Presidential aspirants, Phil Gramm and Bob Dole,
joined Senator Robert Smith to propose legislation instructing the President not
to normalize relations until Vietnam fully discloses all information about the
1,619 Americans still listed as missing in action.

That is a condition that is never likely to be met. The vast majority of names
on the missing list represent probable combat fatalities in which no body was
ever recovered. Vietnam today is doing all that can be expected of it in the
search for American remains. Senator John McCain, himself a Vietnam prisoner of
war for five years, concurs with this view and urges the Administration to
normalize ties.

Vietnam, with more than 70 million people, has been pursuing market reform
policies since the late 1980's and is now one of Asia's hottest markets for
investment and trade. Delaying diplomatic relations keeps American businesses at
a competitive disadvantage compared with their European and Asian rivals.
Vietnam also serves as a potential strategic counterweight against an
increasingly unpredictable China.

Normalization would have been politically easier for George Bush, a decorated
World War II veteran who served on the Nixon Administration's national security
team. Instead, Mr. Bush laid out a "road map" of steps for Vietnam to follow to
win recognition. According to Senator McCain, among others, Vietnam has now
substantially met all of Mr. Bush's tests. It deserves recognition in return.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Voyage of the Damned

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 691 words


On May 13, 1939, the German passenger ship St. Louis left Hamburg, sailing for
Havana. On board were 930 Jewish refugees, all carrying landing certificates for
Cuba.

When the ship arrived, the pro-Fascist Cuban Government would not let them land.
For nine days, the St. Louis circled off Havana and Florida. On June 5, Cuba
said the refugees could go ashore, if they posted a total of $453,000, within a
deliberately impossible 24 hours.

The U.S. refused to allow the passengers onto American soil. On June 6 the ship
headed back to Europe.

Since then, the U.S. has given refuge to millions from many parts of the world.
They gave America their muscle and brain, and love.

Now the U.S. is seized with a fear of compassion, a surrender to the political
campaign against immigrants. Fifty-six springs after the St. Louis, the U.S. is
not only turning away many refugees it would have welcomed not long ago, but is
an essential co-conspiring partner in forcing them back to countries they fled
-- most recently Cuba, Vietnam and Laos. For these people -- including thousands
who once fought on America's side -- the U.S. has become the ship back to hell.

To make the deal with Fidel Castro to send back all Cubans picked up at sea, the
Clinton Administration had to work in utter stealth, for fear the operation
would be discovered. Neither U.S. diplomats responsible for Cuban relations,
Congress nor the press found out until the clandestine deed was done, by four or
five American officials, good men otherwise.

But about the Vietnamese and Laotians, Americans will never be able to say we
did not know; 47,000 of them have been in detention camps in Hong Kong, Thailand
and other Asian countries for years.

They are to be returned to the countries they fled by boat -- carried there in
shackles if need be by the U.N., with America's money and collaboration, the
propaganda of American anti-immigrant groups, and the distaste of their hosts
for extended visits by other Asians, those with much courage but no money.

Soon Congress will vote on a measure by Christopher H. Smith, Republican of New
Jersey, and others that would admit about 20,000 refugees at "high risk," saving
them from the prison planes awaiting them.

After the Vietnam War, many Vietnamese and Laotians were admitted to the U.S.
Left behind in the camps were about 5,500 Laotians who once fought for the U.S.
and Vietnamese also once considered refugees. Some had agreed to return, but in
fear changed their minds -- thus no longer refugees, you see.

Mr. Smith, head of the House Human Rights Subcommittee, is a friend of refugees
and fighter against religious persecution. He calls for a one-time operation,
within existing quotas. U.S. funds would be withdrawn from forced-return
operations, probably killing them.

The State Department has shown how callous it can be when it tries.  When a
Laotian in Colorado asked about countrymen in a Thai camp, back came a letter
from Edward H. Wilkinson, counselor in the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok. He said they
were confined in a special "detention" center. They had violated "decisions"
taken at an international "technical" meeting that forbids people in the camps
from "actively working" against "voluntary repatriation," under pain of
"appropriate" reprisals.  So: Dissidents against their governments are also
punished for dissenting with the international bureaucracy about their fate.

Some Americans friendly to refugees still languishing at America's gates are
cool to attention to the Vietnamese and Laotians. That is not helpful to any
refugees, but to those who want them in chains.

Maybe the Asian refugees will find help someplace. Look at the passengers on the
St. Louis. Turned away by Cuba and the U.S., they found refuge in Britain,
France, Belgium and the Netherlands after the St. Louis returned. Yes, they were
murdered soon enough. But of course the Germans did that, not Cubans or
Americans.

The journey of the St. Louis was sometimes called the voyage of the damned. But
that does not tell us, does it, exactly who were the damned, and at what moment
damnation took place.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Humility and Limits In U.S. Foreign Policy

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words



TEMPTATIONS OF A SUPERPOWER
By Ronald Steel
144 pages. Harvard University Press. $18.95.

In "Pax Americana," his classic 1967 critique of American foreign policy, Ronald
Steel looked at the motives behind two decades of United States intervention
abroad and at its consequences. He argued that World War II ended decades of
American isolationalism by wedding the nation's native idealism to enormous
military might, and that the ensuing cold war had nurtured the country's global
ambitions. In his view, America's fear of Communism and its moralistic desire to
spread its own values to the world at large had had serious repercussions,
including an infatuation with global power and influence, a willingness to
subordinate rationally assessed national interests to grandiose principles, and
"a dangerous gap in our foreign policy between our involvements and our means --
between what we would like to accomplish and what we can reasonably hope to
accomplish."

The 28 years that have passed since the publication of "Pax Americana" have
witnessed enormous changes in the world: the Vietnam War came slouching to a
long-awaited end, Communism unraveled as the Soviet Union fractured and fell
apart, the Berlin wall came tumbling down and a harsh new brand of nationalism
surfaced around the globe. In his latest book, "Temptations of a Superpower,"
Mr. Steel, a professor of international relations at the University of Southern
California, assesses these developments and analyzes America's current foreign
policy objectives, habits and imperatives. The resulting book, based on a
lecture delivered at the Library of Congress in 1993, is both an impassioned
follow-up to "Pax Americana" and a provocative prescription for a new foreign
policy based on humility and a recognition of limits, a prescription that is
bound to be hotly debated in some circles.

The opening chapters of "Temptations," which try to sketch in the dynamics of
current international relations, will be familiar to the reader: not only do Mr.
Steel's musings on the end of the cold war recapitulate his work in "Pax
Americana," but his writings on the evolving global situation also retrace
ground covered by a host of recent foreign policy books. Like Zbigniew
Brzezinski (in "Out of Control: Global Turmoil on the Eve of the 21st Century"),
Mr. Steel speaks of the dangers of a newly fragmented world, rebutting the views
of Western triumphalists like Francis Fukuyama, who foresee the inevitable
victory of liberal democracy around the globe. Like John Lukacs (in "The End of
the 20th Century and the End of the Modern Age"), he predicts the waning power
of both the superpower and the nation-state in general, as well as the fading of
American hegemony. And like William Pfaff (in "Barbarian Sentiments" and "The
Wrath of Nations"), he warns of the perils of America's optimism and of its
desire to remake the world in its own image.

It is when Mr. Steel turns from a broad overview of global politics to the
details of American foreign policy that he most forcefully engages the reader's
attention. As he sees it, "We are still hobbled by our cold war ways of looking
at the world," even though the world has suddenly and spectacularly become a
very different place. He writes that the current military budget of $253 billion
"is down fractionally from the previous year" but "is still 85 percent of the
average cold war level," which makes "it as large as that of all the other
nations of the world combined."

Such expenditures, he continues, have weakened America's ability to compete in
the international marketplace, while Japan and Europe, freed from a focus on
military concerns by the American security umbrella, have been able to
"concentrate on productivity, market penetration, wealth and innovation: the
kind of power that matters most in today's world." Instead of worrying so much
about the nation's "global responsibilities," he argues, American policy makers
might be wiser to focus on the host of domestic problems (from violence in the
streets to poverty and a huge national debt) that make the country an upalatable
role model to other nations. That policy makers have not done so, he suggests,
is partly a reflection of the military bureaucracy's need to perpetuate itself
and partly a reflection of the policy elite's own reluctance to abandon the
heady notion of American hegemony.

As Mr. Steel sees it, the old American goal of containing Communism has recently
given way to the larger (not to mention hubristic) goal of containing "global
disorder," even as anti-Communism has been replaced by Wilsonian idealism "as
the guiding light of American foreign policy." In his view, the Wilsonian
concept of self-determination can lead "to the atomization of human societies,"
while the Wilsonian concept of collective security threatens to "embroil us in
wars everywhere." This latter principle, he observes, was invoked by the United
States in three recent situations involving real or threatened military action:
in Somalia, in Serbia and in Haiti.

"In not one of these cases," Mr. Steel writes, "could it be argued that a vital
American interest was involved. The cold war, for all its irrationalities, was
based on real military, economic and political issues. With the cold war behind
us, we now engage in conflict for reasons of virtue. However desirable this
standard may be for individuals, it is not suited to nations. It can lead either
to unending wars for peace in the name of morality or to a reputation for
hypocrisy and empty rhetoric."

Under what circumstances should America intervene in the internal affairs of
other nations? In Mr. Steel's opinion, justifications come in two categories:
morality ("to alleviate extraordinary and severe degrees of human suffering")
and self-interest ("to protect vital natural resources; to quell regional
disorder in areas vital to American security; to defend the nation's borders";
"to preserve a favorable balance of power in such critical areas as Western
Europe, and to prevent nuclear and ecological threats to our national
well-being").

Although Mr. Steel lays out these arguments in his usual logical, sharp-edged
prose, his discussion of specific examples feels highly perfunctory. In a mere
two pages, he argues that the United States should have intervened in Rwanda and
Cambodia but was correct not to resort to armed intervention in Bosnia because
the death of civilians there "took place in the context of a traditional war
over territory, and neither the intention nor the result was the systematic
eradication of a people, which is the strict definition of genocide." The human
rights abuses in Haiti, he adds, are deplorable but are also part of "the
condition under which much of the world lives." Such highly telescoped
assessments, laid out almost as an afterthought near the end of the book, feel
simplistic, cavalier and coldblooded, and they undermine the more persuasive and
carefully considered arguments in Mr. Steel's book.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ronald Steel (Harvard University Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Links G.O.P. to Boat People's Riots

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 23


United Nations officials asserted today that a Republican-sponsored proposal to
offer asylum in the United States to thousands of Vietnamese boat people set off
riots last weekend that left more than 200 injured in Hong Kong.

They also warned that the bill could lead to a new exodus from Vietnam.

Refugee officials say the riots last Saturday began when 1,500 Vietnamese, many
of them carrying handmade metal spears, refused to be transferred from one
detention camp in Hong Kong to another in preparation for their deportation to
Vietnam. It was the most violent clash in years between the boat people and the
Hong Kong police.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which oversees
the detention camps in Hong Kong, said the Vietnamese were emboldened to riot by
the recent move by Republicans in the House of Representatives to offer asylum
to as many as half of the 40,000 Vietnamese still held in detention camps in
Asia.

"Absolutely," said Jahanshah Assadi, head of mission for the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, when asked if there was a connection between the
legislation and the riots. During the riots, he said, "you saw U.S. flags all
over the place, you saw portraits of President Clinton all over the place."

At least 180 Hong Kong fire, police and corrections officers were hurt in the
clashes on Saturday in the Whitehead detention center, the largest of the Hong
Kong camps used to detain the Vietnamese. Dozens of Vietnamese were also hurt in
battles in which the camp was blanketed by thick clouds of tear gas.

Representative Chris H. Smith, a New Jersey Republican who is a sponsor of the
legislation, said in a statement today in Washington that there was no evidence
of a connection between the legislation and the violence in Hong Kong. It is
"grossly unfair to blame resistance to forced repatriation on the very people
who are trying to come up with a peaceful and gentle solution to the problem of
these refugees," he declared.

Mr. Smith has said that many of the Vietnamese residents of the camps, including
Buddhist monks and former soldiers of the American-backed South Vietnamese
Government, are legitimate political refugees who could be persecuted by
Vietnam's Communist Government if sent home.

While the Republican-drafted legislation is opposed by the Clinton
Administration and faces an uncertain fate in Congress, word of the Republican
plan is already circulating in the camps in Hong Kong, where nearly 21,000
Vietnamese are now detained. Mr. Assadi said in a telephone interview that the
Vietnamese who joined in the riots "have the false hope of going to the United
States."

Even if the bill is defeated in Congress or vetoed by President Clinton, he
said, "the damage has been done," since many Vietnamese now believe that they
can resist deportation because "they have strong support from influential
members of Congress."

Mr. Assadi said the American asylum proposal could also lead to a new exodus of
Vietnamese, taking to rickety boats and pushing off into the dangerous waters of
the South China Sea in the hope of becoming one of the lucky 20,000 who might be
offered resettlement in the United States.

"That risk is definitely there now," he said. The $30 million asylum plan is
part of a foreign affairs appropriations bill now before the full House of
Representatives. The bill has already been approved by the House International
Relations Committee.

While some Vietnamese rioters waved photographs of President Clinton last
weekend, the Administration is in fact a strong advocate of a United
Nations-backed plan to return virtually all of them to Vietnam.

While the United States granted asylum to most of the more than one million
Vietnamese who fled their homeland after the Vietnam War, sympathy for the boat
people has mostly run out. The State Department says that virtually all
Vietnamese who remain in Asian detention camps are economic migrants who have no
legitimate fear of persecution in Vietnam and are not entitled to asylum.

The deportation program, known as the Comprehensive Plan of Action, was supposed
to empty most of the detention camps around Asia -- there are also large camps
in Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand -- by the end of the year.

The Hong Kong Government is clearly outraged that the moves in Congress may have
contributed to the violence in the camps.

                             --------------------


Rebuke by White House

WASHINGTON, May 23 (By The New York Times) -- Administration officials said
today that they had predicted that the proposed Republican measure would
encourage thousands of boat people who were not qualified for refugee status to
refuse to be returned to Vietnam.

"We are opposed to the proposed legislation which, at the 11th hour, seeks to
abrogate an international undertaking," said one State Department official. "The
proposed legislation would reopen large-scale screening of those already found
to be ineligible for refugee status."

Administration officials predicted that the bill would encourage further riots
like the one that occurred on Saturday in Hong Kong.

"The proposed legislation will end voluntary return to Vietnam and create new
levels of false hope and result in further disturbances," a State Department
official said.

Administration officials assert that the $30 million the bill would set aside to
handle the Vietnamese migrants would result in less money being available to
handle those found to be legitimate refugees from Vietnam, Cuba, Bosnia and
Russia.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

China Takes Its Own Way in World Economy;
Islands in Dispute

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 281 words


To the Editor:

A May 19 news article states that China first pressed its claim to the disputed
Spratly Islands in 1992, when it promulgated a law asserting sovereignty over
the potentially oil-rich island group in the shipping lanes of the South China
Sea.

The Chinese pressed their claim to the Spratlys well before 1992. In 1988, for
example, China and Vietnam fought a brief naval battle over the Spratlys. The
Chinese armada captured six positions in the island group, sinking Vietnamese
vessels and leaving 70 Vietnamese dead.

China maintains that the Spratlys are centuries-old Chinese possessions, that
the Chinese were the earliest people to discover and use the Spratlys and that
successive Chinese governments have exercised sovereignty since the 13th
century, with only recent interruptions.

In 1933 the French, then in control of Indochina, occupied some of the islands,
and in 1939 Japan occupied the entire archipelago. After Japan's surrender at
the end of World War II, the Nationalist Government of China reclaimed
sovereignty in 1946. The Nationalists, who fled to Taiwan in 1949 after losing
the Chinese mainland to the Communists, still maintain troops on Itu Aba Island,
the largest in the archipelago.

Since the 1970's other nations have dispatched troops and occupied islands in
the group. In addition to China and Taiwan, title to all or part of the
far-flung Spratlys is claimed by Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei.
This year China occupied Mischief Reef, in an area of the Spratlys also claimed
by the Philippines.

BRADFORD TREBACH
New York, May 22, 1995

The writer is a lawyer specializing in international affairs.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Still the Warrior, Agnew Strides to Place in History

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section B;  Page 13;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 904 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, MAY 24


Twenty-one years after he left the national scene in disgrace, former Vice
President Spiro T. Agnew returned to a merciful, mustier fate in the corridors
of power today and beamed as a bust of himself was unveiled outside the Senate.

The noble gaze of the white marble figure hinted not at all at the turmoil of
Mr. Agnew's departure as Richard M. Nixon's Vice President: a once pugnacious
politician forced to quit after prosecutors had detailed a classic ward-heeler's
graft scandal. Quite simply, he was accused of accepting bribes for years, even
as he worked in the shadow of the White House.

"I'm not blind or deaf to the fact that there are critics who feel this is a
ceremony that should not take place," said the 76-year-old Mr. Agnew, pleasing
longtime friends at the ceremony with a wisp of the scrappiness from his old
campaign days.

"I would remind those people that regardless of their personal view of me, this
ceremony has less to do with Spiro Agnew than with the office I had conferred on
me," he said, noting that all Vice Presidents are entitled to join the sculpture
display that has been maintained for more than a century in the often-overlooked
recesses of the Capitol.

A 20-minute ceremony attended by 300 friends and associates, including a score
of current senators, was marked by a sense of official history and implicit
mercy toward the once popular political warrior who resigned and pleaded no
contest to a tax evasion charge in exchange for assurances that he would not be
imprisoned.

The bribery scandal predated his tenure as Vice President and began in his first
years in office as Baltimore County Executive and continued while he was
Governor of Maryland, according to Federal prosecutors. They said accumulated
testimony from Mr. Agnew's associates proved that he had solicited and accepted
payments of tens of thousands of dollars from Maryland public works contractors
during a 10-year period.

A master of suburban politics, Mr. Agnew is still well remembered in Maryland
for a stylish, casual cronyism that extended to friends who stocked his home
with free food and drink.

None of this history dims the clean lines and peace of the Agnew bust, to be set
eventually in a relatively prominent turning on the second floor just down from
a main door of the debating chamber. It is taking the place of the bust of Levi
P. Morton, prominent a century ago as a New York Governor and Vice President in
the Benjamin Harrison Administration. That work is being moved to the first
floor as part of a reorganization of the statuary undertaken by Senator Ted
Stevens, the Alaska Republican who is chairman of the Rules committee.

"Lord God, you are the ultimate judge," Senator Mark O. Hatfield prayed in
benediction, capturing the mood of the ceremony. "Each day we are grateful for
your forgiveness of our trespasses."

Looking trim-figured, sharp-eyed and confident, Mr. Agnew basked in a standing
ovation in which Senator Bob Packwood, currently mired in his own official
controversy, was among the first on his feet to offer strong applause.

In brief remarks, Bob Dole, the Senate majority leader, chose to focus on Mr.
Agnew's fierce patriotism during the divisive Vietnam era, saying, "Millions of
Americans were proud to stand with him." Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a New
York Democrat who was a staff veteran of the Nixon Administration, saluted Mr.
Agnew for finding "the pulse of mid-America" as part of a "new breed" of
campaigner.

But for all the ceremony's dedication to history, there was no mention of Mr.
Agnew's role in the searing crisis in modern American government precipitated by
his resignation and that of President Nixon less than a year later in the
separate abuse of power scandal known as Watergate.

"Vice President Agnew was a reflection of his time, and the collection should
represent that," said Don Ritchie, associate Senate historian, in an interview,
contemplating the bust as a stony object lesson in the power of politics to
immortalize and stigmatize in a single career.

"Aaron Burr's in there, why not Vice President Agnew?" asked Tom Korologos, a
Nixon Administration veteran and Agnew loyalist. He noted the Senate
collection's embrace of each Vice President, even Burr, who fled after slaying
Alexander Hamilton in a New Jersey duel but stopped off here to preside over a
fond farewell in the Senate.

"You've got to look at the whole man, the loyalty he gave to President Nixon,"
Mr. Korologos said in an interview. "He was beaten about the head and shoulders,
and that's life. He went out. And now he's back."

Mr. Agnew, a gleaming stump presence with serene features that translated easily
to marble, clearly shared a sense of being back from oblivion, at least for the
ceremony. He grinned as he thanked the sculptor, William Behrends, for capturing
"my squinty little eyes and mastodonic nose" in the $50,000 work.

He left the gathering with a heart-felt defense of the office of Vice President
against "condecension and disdain." Even more, he admitted to the personal
comfort of having been elected and re-elected Vice President by American voters,
who "made me a part of the history reflected in the symbols and statuary we see
around us."

Mr. Agnew, the 39th Vice President, left the official stage once more, this time
to another ovation, his image standing firmly as a reminder to the public and to
history.

NAME: Spiro T. Agnew

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Harold Wilson, Twice British Prime Minister and Old Lion of Labor Party, Dies at
79

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2191 words


Harold Wilson, a Yorkshireman who combined a common touch with an uncommon
intellect that turned him into the British Labor Party's most formidable vote
getter and perennial Prime Minister, died early yesterday in London. He was 79.

Lady Wilson, his wife of 55 years, issued a statement saying Lord Wilson "died
peacefully in his sleep around midnight." The cause of death was not given, but
he was reported to have been fighting cancer for over a decade.

He was admitted to St. Thomas's Hospital in central London on Sunday as a
patient under the National Health Service, in keeping with his political image
as a man of few pretensions and no taste for the lavish life.

In recent years Lord Wilson -- he was made a baron in 1983 -- had faded from
public view, largely because of illness. He spoke only four times during debates
in the House of Lords, most recently nine years ago, although he attended
sessions faithfully until last year.

Both Houses of Parliament cut sessions short yesterday in his honor, and
tributes flowed from political figures of all parties. Prime Minister John
Major, a Conservative, said: "Over four decades, Harold Wilson was at the center
of British public life. From the time of his appointment to Cabinet at the age
of 31, he served his country diligently and loyally."

Tony Blair, the new Labor leader who hopes to emulate Mr. Wilson's feat of
leading the party to victory after more than a decade in opposition, said he had
implanted "a deep sense of modern vision for the country."

Mr. Wilson was that rarest of political creatures -- a Labor leader who could
actually win elections. He won four out of five general elections and occupied
No. 10 Downing Street for nearly eight years in the 1960's and 1970's, a run
surpassed this century in peacetime only by Margaret Thatcher's 11 1/2 years.

He was not a man of the hour or for all seasons. There was no air of destiny
about him. The ringing inspirations of Sir Winston Churchill and the patrician
visions of Harold Macmillan were not his style. He was rotund, provincial,
resolutely middle-class, studiously ambiguous and sometimes wavering in his
opinions.

But in an era of precipitous decline for Britain and its once-global empire,
Harold Wilson was a fixture on the political scene for 30 years, a solid
workingman's socialist in a rumpled ready-to-wear suit and his trademark Gannex
mackintosh.

As leader of the Laborites for 13 years and as Prime Minister for nearly eight
-- from 1964 to 1970 and again from 1974 to 1976 -- the silver-haired,
pipe-smoking northerner was a consummate British politician: tenacious, shrewd,
manipulative, a blend of homespun tastes, acid wit and pragmatic, often shifting
policies.

A brilliant Oxford-educated economist and the boy wonder of British politics
after World War II, Mr. Wilson was first elected to Parliament in 1945 at the
age of 29. At 31 he became Britain's youngest Cabinet minister since the 18th
century; at 46 he was the opposition leader and at 48 the Prime Minister.

His adversaries regarded him as crude, ambitious, indecisive and dangerously
unpredictable, a loner who seemed to lack ideals or clear-cut ideologies beyond
a commitment to his own political survival.

But to his admirers, he was the symbol of an emerging middle-class Briton and
the dominant figure in a struggle to hold his party and his country together
during years of painful adjustment to contracting British influence abroad and
economic corrosion at home.

Besides an inflation rate that soared to 25 percent and widespread labor
tensions, he faced an uprising in Northern Ireland, a breakaway regime in
Rhodesia, a resurgence of nationalism in Scotland and Wales and deep
uncertainties over Britain's entry into the European Union, then known as the
European Common Market.

Mr. Wilson sent troops to Northern Ireland to no avail. He imposed economic
sanctions on the white-minority regime in Rhodesia, as colonial Zimbabwe was
known, to no effect. In one of his few foreign-policy achievements, he
engineered a national referendum in 1975 that ratified British membership in the
Common Market.

One of his most notable achievements was keeping British troops out of the war
in Vietnam. He resisted blandishments from President Lyndon B. Johnson to enter
the conflict, but in an uneasy compromise that drew a furious response from the
left wing and youth movements at home, gave verbal support to American
involvement there.

Critics were quick to point out that his position on British membership in the
European Common Market had flipflopped over the years. He favored it when he was
Prime Minister in 1969, then vigorously opposed it two years later when he was
out of office and polls showed membership to be unpopular. When he returned to
office, he reversed himself again.

"He switched sides on great issues with breathtaking brass," one critic once
said.

To those who attacked his accommodations, Mr. Wilson replied: "I'm not
doctrinaire, I just want to get on with the job."

While he did not halt his nation's economic decline, he jawboned labor unions to
restrain wage demands, reduced Government spending, imposed limited price
controls and then managed to keep social and industrial tensions at bay.

As leader of the Labor Party, Mr. Wilson was regarded as a masterful infighter
and perhaps the only politician capable at that time of holding together its
fractious coalition of social democrats, trade unionists and doctrinaire
leftists. He himself hovered elusively somewhere between left and center, a
hard-to-hit moving target.

His resignation on March 16, 1976 -- three years before the next scheduled
election and a few days after his 60th birthday -- stunned his party and the
nation.

There had been no apparent scandal-in-the-making to force him out. His health
appeared to be good, and by all accounts he stood on solid political ground. He
said he wanted to make way for new leaders and new ideas, but the explanation
seemed incomplete.

The enigma remained. He retired to a back bench in Parliament and a back seat in
politics, addressing public issues only occasionally.

Strange controversies bubbled up from time to time. In 1986 came the most
bizarre story of all, allegations in the memoirs of a former counterespionage
agent, Peter Wright, that the British counterintelligence agency, M.I.5, had
tried to destabilize the Wilson Government.

Mrs. Thatcher told the Commons in 1987 that an internal M.I.5 inquiry had
determined that no right-wing faction inside the security service had tried any
such thing. But rumors of such a campaign against Mr. Wilson continued for
years.

Several months after his departure as Prime Minister, Queen Elizabeth II named
him a Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, a nonhereditary
knighthood that is one of Britain's highest honors. He held onto his seat in the
House of Commons until June 1983, when he was awarded the life peerage of a
barony and took the name Baron Wilson of Rievaulx, after a ruined abbey in
Yorkshire, and moved to the upper house.

The immense popularity of Harold Wilson had been rooted in his plain style as
well as in his flexible politics. A short man with a pale face and the flat
accents of his native Colne Valley in Yorkshire, he had no affected
public-school stammer, no stable of subtle literary illusions.

He belonged to no clubs, hated cocktail parties and rarely invited people to
dinner. He was fond of HP sauce. He preferred beer to wine, soccer to concerts
and whodunits to nonfiction.

"I haven't read Karl Marx," he once admitted. "I got stuck on that footnote on
page 2."

He and his wife, the former Gladys Mary Baldwin, were married in 1940, and had
two sons, Robin and Giles. In London, the Wilsons eschewed pomp and ceremony
whenever possible and seemed out of place at Downing Street. After his return to
office in 1974, Mr. Wilson did not even take up official residence there,
preferring to stay in his own house a few blocks away. His life style regularly
inspired satirists.

Private Eye, a satiric magazine, for a time ran a weekly column called "Mrs.
Wilson's Diary" that detailed a lower middle-class life at 10 Downing Street.
One thrust at a Cabinet lunch noted: "We had prepared two large caldrons of
savory mutton hash and two jumbo-sized syrup puddings kindly supplied by the
London Co-op."

James Harold Wilson was born on March 11, 1916, in Huddersfield, in the north of
England, a grim industrial region of poverty and radical politics. His father,
Herbert, was an industrial chemist and a lifelong radical who took much of the
credit for his son's political views. His mother, the former Ethel Sedden, was a
counselor for the British equivalent of the Girl Scouts.

A scholarly, bookish youth with a prodigious memory, he attended schools in
Huddersfield and Cheshire, received a scholarship to Oxford and graduated with
the highest honors in philosophy, politics and economics. At 21, he became a
lecturer in economics at Oxford and an assistant to Lord Beveridge, the
architect of Britain's welfare state.

With the outbreak of World War II, the young teacher volunteered for the army
but was instead drafted by the Government into civil-service ranks to take
advantage of his skills as an economist. He served in the Ministry of Fuel and
Power and on the Anglo-American Coal Commission and produced a statistical
digest of British mining that was published in 1945 as a book, "New Deal for
Coal."

Entering politics in 1945, he dropped his first name and, as Harold Wilson, was
elected to a seat in the House of Commons in the Labor landslide that ousted
Churchill. He represented Ormskirk, near Liverpool.

Two years later, he was appointed President of the Board of Trade, the British
equivalent of Commerce Secretary, in the Government of Clement Attlee, becoming
Britain's youngest Cabinet Minister since William Pitt became Chancellor of the
Exchequer in 1792.

Mr. Wilson's rise through Labor Party ranks was swift, and on the way he
acquired the reputation for wheeling and dealing that remained throughout his
political life.

In the opposition, he became Labor's spokesman on finance and foreign affairs,
and in 1960 he decided to run against his good friend, Hugh Gaitskell, for the
leadership of the floundering party. Amid cries of betrayal, Mr. Wilson was
overwhelmingly defeated. But in 1963, after Mr. Gaitskell's death, he won the
leadership in a fight with George Brown, who was supported by the labor unions.

The general election of 1964 was pivotal. Confronted by crippling miners'
strikes and spreading economic problems, the Conservatives, led by Sir Alec
Douglas-Home, lost a five-seat majority to the Labor Party and surrendered the
reins of Government to Mr. Wilson, ending 13 years of class-bound Tory rule.

Mr. Wilson moved swiftly to end an epidemic of strikes and get the nation back
to work. He also raised pensions, froze rents, announced subsidies on certain
food staples, moved to cut profit margins and mortgage rates and imposed price
controls on many items.

In his first term, Mr. Wilson made three decisions that proved popular but of
dubious merit. He refused to devalue the pound, kept troops in the Far East and,
in 1965, said he would never use force against white Rhodesians, insisting that
economic sanctions alone would undercut the rebel regime of Ian Smith.

In 1966, he called a general election and managed to widen his party's majority
to 100 seats in the House of Commons. In the next four years he reversed many of
his first-term policies, devaluing the pound and withdrawing troops from the Far
East.

With unemployment rising, he fell into conflict with labor unions, called an
election for June 1970 and, despite polls forecasting a Labor victory, lost to
the Conservatives, whose leader, Edward Heath, became Prime Minister.

But four years later, in February 1974, when a miners' strike against Mr.
Heath's compulsory wage controls precipitated another election, Mr. Wilson
staged a remarkable political comeback, and Labor formed a minority government.
After consolidating his forces, he called for another election in October 1974
and won a narrow majority.

When he resigned unexpectedly in 1976, commentators noted that he had solidified
British membership in the Common Market, kept the nation in NATO despite
requisite defense cuts, maintained Britain's influence in a rapidly changing
Commonwealth and preserved a strong relationship with the United States.

Domestically, his Government made a deep impact in changing the system of
secondary education and expanding higher education. He was proudest of his
"brainchild," the Open University for continuing education, which by the 1980's
was awarding more degrees than Oxford and Cambridge combined.

Even his opponents conceded that it would be difficult to imagine British
politics without him. "He has by cautious and conservative leadership restored
the basis for government by consent," said The New Statesman. "He has come
closer than any politician in his time to an instinctive understanding of the
British people."


NAME: Harold Wilson

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 1995, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An obituary on Thursday about former Prime Minister Harold Wilson, who first
joined the British Cabinet at age 31, misstated the date of the first Cabinet
appointment of William Pitt, the youngest British Cabinet member ever. Pitt
became Chancellor of the Exchequer at age 23 in 1782, not 1792.


GRAPHIC: Photos: One of Harold Wilson's most notable achievements as Prime
Minister was keeping British troops out of the war in Vietnam. He resisted
blandishments from President Lyndon B. Johnson, left, shown here greeting the
British leader at the White House in December 1965. In the background, center,
is the British Ambassador, Sir Patrick Dean, with the Acting Secretary of State,
George Ball, at rear right. (United Press International, 1965); Harold Wilson.
(Syndicate International, 1968)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 26, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Capitol Power Grab

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 27;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 671 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The Articles of Confederation, which joined the American states together in
1781, assigned the running of foreign affairs to Congress. The idea was such a
dismal failure that in 1787 the Framers of the Constitution made the President
the principal voice of the United States abroad.

Now the Republicans who control Congress are trying to move us back toward the
Articles of Confederation. That is the thrust of a bill on which the House has
begun work, the American Overseas Interests Act, and of the equivalent Senate
bill.

The legislation would give directions to President Clinton on a long list of
matters. They range from tiny questions of detail to major policy issues.

One section, for example, directs the President to recognize Tibet as a
"sovereign country" and send an ambassador to the Dalai Lama's "government" in
exile. Many of us condemn the Chinese occupation and cruel mistreatment of
Tibet. But to recognize it as an independent country would be a break with
history, an extraordinary step with grave destabilizing consequences for
relations with China.

Another provision would limit aid to countries that engage in intelligence
activities in the United States. Most diplomatic missions in Washington must
have intelligence officers on their staffs. Who can tell what the effect of this
murky language -- or myriad other examples -- would be? The House bill, 358
pages long, is full of efforts at micromanagement.

Legislative intervention in foreign policy is a distinctly American phenomenon,
one that bewilders and alarms other countries. In its modern form I believe it
can be traced, like other distortions in our politics, to the Vietnam War. Abuse
of executive power there led to assertions of corrective Congressional power.

President Johnson said he would not use the Tonkin Gulf Resolution as general
authority to make war in Indochina, and then he did. As he and President Nixon
spent more and more lives, Congress eventually put restrictions on bombing and
other war activities.

The lesson of the need to respect Congress's undoubted authority over the making
of war was not learned. In the Persian Gulf crisis President Bush made the
constitutionally outlandish claim that he did not need Congressional
authorization to wage a massive war.

Human rights concerns also provoked Congressional action. Mr. Nixon and Henry
Kissinger were so friendly to such dictators as Gen. Augusto Pinochet in Chile
that Congress began imposing human rights conditions on aid.

But the legislation now in Congress carries the pattern of recent history to a
wild extreme. Even scholars who have warned against abuse of Presidential power
agree that the President has plenary power in some areas of foreign policy,
notably in diplomacy and recognition.

Partisanship is undoubtedly behind the extremism of the moment. The newly
empowered Republicans in Congress see a chance to write every odd item on their
wish list into law and at the same time stick it to Bill Clinton.

Secretary of State Christopher was moved to speak out, calling for a veto that
the President then threatened, not only because he is in this Administration but
because he is a lawyer concerned about the constitutional separation of powers.

"Congress does have a role in foreign policy," Mr. Christopher said in an
interview. "But it is unworkable and unconstitutional to dictate where we put
our diplomatic missions or with whom the President can negotiate. Other
countries are entitled to rely on the voice of the President."

Lawrence Eagleburger, the last Secretary of State in a Republican
Administration, put it more bluntly. "The House has gone crazy," he told
National Public Radio. "The restrictions and demands on the President are an
absolute attack on the separation of powers."

House Republican leaders suspended debate on the bill Wednesday, so perhaps they
have been moved by the reaction against its excesses. Even partisans may stop
short of making the United States look silly to the world.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 26, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

If Nations Owned Up to Their Misdeeds

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


To the Editor:

What a relief to read in your editorial "Recognize Vietnam" (May 23) the blunt
statement -- only 20 years after the fact -- that "the North Vietnamese
Communists won the Vietnam War."

One might conclude from this acknowledgment that the United States lost the war,
but you did not say anything nearly so damning, nor has any American Government
official near the top of the chain admitted even so much as what you stated.

In the 1960's, in an attempt to cut losses before the casualties mounted to
dreadful heights, at least one United States Senator suggested we just claim
victory and bring our troops home.

Many years and many hundreds of thousands of killed and wounded later, the Nixon
Administration in effect accepted that recommendation.

As I understand it, the Clinton Administration (like each of its predecessors)
is still pretending the United States did not lose the war.

You and other respectable sources now write frankly about the "C.I.A.-led coup
in Guatemala" in 1954. Will it take 40 or more years for American Government
officials to acknowledge that coup?

A while ago, the highest Japanese Government officials were quoted as refusing
to say they were sorry for the atrocities committed during World War II because
the United States had not yet apologized for dropping atomic bombs.

Indeed, some apology by America is long overdue, but really, is it that
difficult for some duly authorized government officials to do the decent thing
first?

JOE MORTON
Professor of Philosophy
Director, Peace Studies
Goucher College
Baltimore, May 23, 1995

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 27, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
An Unusual Turn in a Democratic Race: Clinton Has the Field All to Himself

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


While the ever-expanding group of Republican Presidential competitors has been
drawing the attention recently, there has been a significant development in the
Democratic field: it has narrowed to one.

Only months after leading Democrats were bracing for a serious challenge to be
made against President Clinton for his party's nomination next year, many now
say they do not expect it to materialize.

Of course, a challenger could still emerge -- they have been a regular feature
of Democratic politics since World War II. But even if that happens, many
Democrats say, it is probably too late for a rival to put together the money and
organization needed to force Mr. Clinton from the race or cost him the
nomination.

"I personally think that it's too late for a credible candidate," said Donald L.
Fowler, the Democratic national chairman. "There's much less conversation about
it. Truly, almost no one asks that question any more."

This favorable turn for the President does not reflect wide contentment with him
among Democrats -- the party is still struggling to regroup from its devastating
performance last November. Rather, it stems from several other factors that have
discouraged potential rivals.

For one thing, Mr. Clinton's popularity has improved a little. And, unless
Whitewater explodes again onto the front pages, there seems to be no burning
issue on which a challenger could base a candidacy, as happened in 1992 when
Patrick J. Buchanan attacked President George Bush's renunciation of the
no-new-taxes pledge, and in 1968, when Senator Eugene J. McCarthy helped drive
President Lyndon B. Johnson from the race by opposing the Vietnam War.

"Do I feel some great groundswell of enthusiasm out there? No," Duane B.
Garrett, a major Democratic fund-raiser who was co-chairman of Walter F.
Mondale's Presidential campaign in 1984, said of Mr. Clinton. "Do I feel that
people are happier with him than they were six months ago? You bet. People see a
glimmer of hope of re-election because of the way the Republicans have lurched
to the right."

This newly found hope, if not optimism, among Democrats comes in part because
Mr. Clinton has rebounded somewhat in the polls in the last month or two,
particularly after the Oklahoma City bombing, diminishing the chances of a
successful challenge. And though they have at times been clumsy, overtures that
the President has made recently both to the liberal and moderate wings of his
party have left no obvious ideological opening for a candidate.

There also may be a dash of practical politics: Every time in recent history
that an incumbent Democratic President has been challenged, he has retired or
lost. Mr. Johnson retired in 1968, as did President Harry S. Truman in 1952. And
while President Jimmy Carter overcame Senator Edward M. Kennedy's challenge in
1980, he lost the general election to Ronald Reagan.

The Clinton Administration may also be responsible for some of its good fortune.
While Mr. Clinton has been slow to assemble his re-election team -- he has yet
to even name a campaign manager -- the Democrats have moved aggressively to put
down any ferment for a challenge in the early primary states.

The White House has been particularly attentive to New Hampshire, home of the
first primary, to the point of inviting the editor of The Concord Monitor to a
White House state dinner in March.

The most prominent contenders who were believed to be positioning themselves to
take on the President -- including Representative Richard A. Gephardt of
Missouri, the House minority leader, and Senators Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and
Bill Bradley of New Jersey -- are hardly insurgents. While all three have made
comments suggesting strong disappointment with Mr. Clinton at one time or
another, they are established party figures who do not seem inclined to risk
damaging their reputations and dividing their party for what might be a futile
run.

One candidate on the right who had announced he would run against Mr. Clinton --
former Gov. Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania -- withdrew from the race last
month. Mr. Casey, who would have made his opposition to abortion the centerpiece
of his challenge, underwent a heart and liver transplant in 1993 and said he did
not feel he had the "extraordinary energy level" needed for the run. On the
left, the Rev. Jesse Jackson has toyed with taking on Mr. Clinton. But his
recent comments on the subject suggest he is more likely to wage an independent
candidacy.

While some Democrats speculated that Mr. Clinton could better establish himself
as a moderate by turning back a challenge from the more liberal Mr. Jackson,
many prominent Democrats say it would be better for the President not to have
anyone in his own party tearing him apart.

"In a practical and a political sense, we were all happy and pleased when
Governor Casey dropped out," Mr. Fowler said. "A challenger would pose a
significant complication, not in the nomination, but in the energy and resources
that could be devoted to the general election."

The reality that many potential challengers face is that Mr. Clinton is an
extraordinarily skillful campaigner who would have the weight and the prestige
of the White House behind him -- benefits that could help him overcome his
vulnerability on issues and unpopularity with many Democrats.

In the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll of Democratic voters, support for
the President was hardly overwhelming: 6 out of 10 said he should be
renominated, while 3 out of 10 said another Democrat should get the nod. Mr.
Clinton's popularity has improved slightly since that poll was taken from April
1 to 4. But Clinton loyalists note that for all the critics, most of the latest
polls show him in a dead heat with Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican
front-runner.

Gary Hindes, chairman of the Delaware Democratic Party, said there was a sense
of resignation rather than elation over Mr. Clinton's bid for re-election.

"As much as people mumble and grumble, they realize the Presidency brings a lot
of prestige and power to bear," Mr. Hindes said. "You might have an exciting
challenge, but you end up losing. If there was ever a weak President, it was
Jerry Ford -- and Ronald Reagan could not get that nomination away from him
because of the power of the Presidency."

Though predictions of a challenge are not as prevalent as they were a few months
ago, some prominent Democrats still say it is only a matter of time before
history repeats itself and another Democratic President finds himself facing a
challenger.

"It's less likely to be as substantial than it would have been two or three
months ago," said Senator Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois. "But there will
likely be some kind of a challenge. Part of it is the nature of politics today.
And part of it is some dissatisfaction that is out there."

Vice President Al Gore is more optimistic, but cautiously so. "We'll take it as
it comes," Mr. Gore said. "I always felt that the President was doing such a
good job that it would be unlikely. But I don't have a crystal ball."

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 28, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1458 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   5   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2      2   3   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) Over the years, a prosecutor finds that an
                unusual murder case haunts her career and private life.

 3      4   5   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 4      3  65   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 5      5  49   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 6      8  146  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 7*     6   8   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 8      7   3   BEAUTY FROM ASHES, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A
                Georgia family endures the divisive stresses of the Civil War.

 9          1   MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport
                pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.

 10    10  14   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 11     9   2   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 12    15  10   PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four
                poems celebrating women.

 13    12   3   THE CAROUSEL, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $23.95.) Compulsion
                and revenge threaten the survival of a family dynasty noted for
                its respectability.

 14    11   8   A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy,
                a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.

 15        11   THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The
                unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish
                town.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      2  33   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 2      1   5   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 3      4  22   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 4      8   2   LISTEN TO MY HEART, by Kathie Lee Gifford and Cody Gifford.
                (Hyperion, $12.95.) The television personality tells her 4
                1/2-year-old son about matters like family relationships and
                good manners.

 5      3  64   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6      7   4   MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                actress reminisces about her four decades in Hollywood.

 7      6   6   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 8      5  15   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 9         19   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 10         1   KATHARINE HEPBURN, by Barbara Leaming. (Crown, $27.50.) A
                biography of the legendary actress.

 11    11  75   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 12         1   SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White.
                (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her
                adventures while traveling and dealing with folks at home.

 13    13  38   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 14*   14   3   LIZ, by C. David Heymann. (Birch Lane/Carol, $24.95.) A
                biography of Elizabeth Taylor.

 15    10   2   PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist
                tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill
                daughter.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  51   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 2      1  105  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      3  10   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 4          3   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer's advice.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 13, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ATHENA, by John Banville. (Knopf, $22.) In this wickedly mannerist novel, a
murderer turned "art expert" runs smack into his own past when he has to
catalogue a batch of stolen Old Masters.

GOD: A Biography, by Jack Miles. (Knopf, $27.50.) Not a joke but a scholarly,
entertaining literary inquiry into the character called God as His multiple
personalities have been rendered through the ages in the Hebrew Bible.

THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg.
(Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a
wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct
under the old regimes.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES, by Robert Musil. Translated by Sophie Wilkins and
Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the
unfinished and unfinishable novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and
Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged
readership.

ONE BY ONE FROM THE INSIDE OUT: Essays and Reviews on Race and Responsibility in
America, by Glenn C. Loury. (Free Press, $25.) An African-American economist
tackles race and poverty in a collection of biting pieces that emphasize black
self-help while also calling on the Government to aid the nation's poor.

OSWALD'S TALE: An American Mystery, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.)
Stoked by a passion to believe J.F.K.'s death was more than a meaningless
absurdity, Mr. Mailer pursues and delivers the assassin's very slightly
significant soul, using his own research and that of others.

POPE JOHN PAUL II: The Biography, by Tad Szulc. (Lisa Drew/Scribner, $27.50.)
Mr. Szulc, a seasoned reporter of Polish birth, inquires into the special
circumstances of Polish Catholicism and the special stresses of fascist and
Communist domination that formed the present Pope.

A RIVER TOWN, by Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $24.) It's 1899 in
Mr. Keneally's impassioned 21st novel, and Tim Shea, an outsider in an Australia
with no insiders, inexorably digs himself into deeper and deeper trouble by
always trying to do the right thing.

RULE OF THE BONE, by Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $22.) A novel that
reinvigorates the Huck Finn myth in the person of Chappie, a mall rat from
upstate New York who lights out for Jamaica with a runaway farm worker.

WALT WHITMAN'S AMERICA: A Cultural Biography, by David S. Reynolds. (Knopf,
$35.) An intensive historical excavation, aiming to show how Whitman, an
enthusiast for almost everything, transmuted into his poetry images from all
aspects of American culture.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS: The Gulf War Veteran;
Victorious in War, Not Yet at Peace

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AMERICA is fickle about its wars, and how it treats the men and women who fought
them.

The Allied victory in World War II seemed to transform veterans into
heroes-for-life; the nation embraced them from the moment they returned, with
the G.I. Bill and a booming economy, and has feted them again 50 years later.
Korea and Vietnam were messier conflicts with ambiguous endings that left
returning soldiers forgotten, bitter or worse.

When the Persian Gulf war came along, a friendless Iraqi enemy was dispatched in
a 43-day blitz of high-tech weaponry with relatively few American casualties.
Troops basking in homecoming parades across the country seemed poised to
recapture the respect that World War II veterans enjoyed.

But veterans' advocates and counselors say that expectation has gone
unfulfilled. And as the nation tomorrow honors those who have died in battle,
they say, an emerging profile of gulf war veterans suggests they may have more
in common with Vietnam-era soldiers than World War II troops.




'Disappointed'

Thousands of gulf veterans remain in the military, many using their combat
records to climb swiftly through the ranks. But thousands of others are
suffering mysterious ailments. Gulf veterans are experiencing higher rates of
unemployment, divorce and alcohol abuse than Vietnam-era vets, counselors say.

"I'm disappointed the way our country has treated us," said Charles
Sheehan-Miles, 24, a tank loader in the gulf who is now executive director of
the Gulf War Veterans of New England. "I'm afraid we're getting closer to the
public image the Vietnam veterans had."

That image of a disillusioned and embittered soldier may make it tempting to
force into the gulf profile someone like Timothy J. McVeigh, an Army sergeant in
the war who is charged in the Oklahoma City bombing. But experts say there is no
evidence that gulf veterans are more likely to become political extremists or
violent criminals.

The gulf war veterans have problems enough, however, and some seem all the more
puzzling because the military's demographics have changed dramatically since a
largely conscripted United States army fought in Southeast Asia. In the Middle
East, the Pentagon fielded a better-educated and better-trained all-volunteer
force, supported by tens of thousands of reservists called to active duty.
Nearly 60 percent of the more than 550,000 soldiers sent to the gulf were
married and had dependents, proportionally three times as many as the soldiers
in Vietnam. About 35,000 women were sent to the gulf, as were 16,337 single
parents and 1,231 married couples.

Popular support for the gulf warriors soared as it never did for those who
fought in Vietnam or Korea. But four years after the war's end, doctors,
counselors and veterans advocates realize the ebullient, brief welcome-home was
a poor augury. "Desert Storm vets got a parade, something we didn't get, but
then the country looked away," said Richard Fitzpatrick, executive director of
the National Coalition for Homeless Veterans.

Within a year of returning home, many gulf veterans who joined the military for
a career were handed pink slips, casualties of the Pentagon's post-cold war
cuts. Unlike those returning after World War II, these new civilians faced a
sinking economy -- an era of restructuring and corporate downsizing, of
disorienting shifts in the demand for labor.

More than 30,000 veterans have complained of a gulf war syndrome, whose symptoms
include fatigue, muscle pain and breathing trouble. Preliminary reports say most
of those examined have ordinary, diagnosable illnesses, while a small portion
have symptoms that are unexplained. President Clinton signed an order on Friday
creating a committee to examine the Government's efforts to cope with these
baffling cases.

Psychiatrists say that about 10 to 15 percent of gulf war veterans in several
small studies suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder, an anxiety disorder
caused by a stressful event, like combat or a natural disaster. The rate is
comparable to that found among Vietnam-era vets, and the numbers could have been
higher, officials say, had military doctors not learned from Vietnam how to
recognize and treat the warning signs of combat trauma more quickly.

Many gulf veterans say their problems stem from a dissonance between what they
saw and what the public saw. In August 1992, a 33-year-old Army reservist who
worked as a supervisor cataloguing the Iraqi war dead came to Bill Sautner, a
veterans' counseling therapist in Orlando, with photographs he and his friends
had taken of burned-out tanks, bloody bunkers and charred bodies of Iraqi
soldiers.

"He and many other gulf war vets saw the full range of war's destruction --
images that he still relives today," said Mr. Sautner, whose patient requested
anonymity. "But the public only saw a sanitized, impersonal view on TV."

Haunted by such memories, veterans had mixed feelings about their homecoming.
"The gulf war vets came back from a four-day ground war as heroes, but when in
groups with other combatants who fought a year or more in the jungles, they'll
be apologetic and feel a certain amount of guilt," said Dr. Joseph Gelsomino,
who runs 28 veterans centers in the Southeast.

The combination of a weak economy, medical problems and a lack of affordable
housing have helped make gulf veterans the fastest-growing segment of the
nation's 271,000 homeless veterans. Vincent Torrez, a 29-year-old former
military police officer, lives at a Salvation Army shelter in Long Island City,
Queens, while looking for work. "It's very competitive and there are a lot of
people with degrees," said Mr. Torrez, a high-school graduate who attended
Marist College for a year. "But I think the Lord will look out for me. I might
not get what I want, but I'll get what I need."

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Like Vietnam veterans, gulf veterans have high levels of
homelessness and joblessness. Vincent Torrez lives at a shelter in Queens.
(Edward Keating/The New York Times)

Graph: "Homeless Veterens" (Source: National Colalition for Homeless Veterens)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Votes in Congress

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 36;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 528 words


Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York

Senate

1. Tax Cuts: Vote on an amendment to a budget bill that would include tax cuts
of more than $300 billion in the overall plan that is supposed to balance the
budget within seven years. Rejected 69 to 31, May 23.

2. Checkoff: Vote on an amendment to a budget bill that would remove a provision
eliminating a $3 income tax checkoff that sets aside Federal money for
presidential campaigns. Approved 56 to 44, May 24.

3. Tax Cuts: Vote to put the Senate on record in favor of using any "economic
dividend" from balancing the budget to reduce families' taxes and encourage
savings investment and job creation. Approved 54 to 45, May 25.

4. Budget: Vote on a proposed budget calling for nearly $1 trillion in savings
by 2002. Approved 57 to 42, May 25.

5. Spending Cuts: Vote on a House-Senate compromise bill that would cut $16.5
billion in spending from the current year's budget and allot money for disaster
in California and Oklahoma City. Approved 61 to 38, May 25.

                              1        2        3        4        5
Connecticut
Dodd (D)                      Nay      Yea      Nay      Nay      Nay
Lieberman (D)                 Nay      Yea      Yea      Nay      Nay

New Jersey
Bradley (D)                   Nay      Yea      Nay      Nay      Nay
Lautenberg (D)                Nay      Yea      Nay      Nay      Nay

New York
D'Amato (R)                   Nay      Nay      Yea      Yea      Yea
Moynihan (D)                  Nay      Yea      Nay      Nay      Nay


House

1. Foreign Aid: Vote on an amendment to a foreign aid bill that would bar money
from going to international agencies promoting family planning and abortion.
Approved 240 to 181, May 24.

2. Foreign Aid: Vote on an amendment to a foreign aid bill that would keep
intact a provision disallowing repatriation of refugees to Vietnam and Laos.
Approved 266 to 156, May 24.

                              1         2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)               Nay       Yea
2. Gejdenson (D)              Nay       Nay
3. DeLauro (D)                Nay       Nay
4. Shays (R)                  Nay       Yea
5. Franks (R)                 Nay       Yea
6. Johnson (R)                Nay       Nay

New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)                Nay       Yea
2. LoBiondo (R)               Yea       Yea
3. Saxton (R)                 Yea       Yea
4. Smith (R)                  Yea       Yea
5. Roukema (R)                Nay       Nay
6. Pallone (D)                Nay       Nay
7. Franks (R)                 A         Yea
8. Martini (R)                Nay       Yea
9. Torricelli (D)             Nay       Yea
10. Payne (D)                 Nay       Nay
11. Frelinghuysen (R)         Nay       Nay
12. Zimmer (R)                Nay       Yea
13. Menendez (D)              Nay       Yea

New York
1. Forbes (R)                 Yea       Yea
2. Lazio (R)                  Nay       Yea
3. King (R)                   Yea       Yea
4. Frisa (R)                  Yea       Yea
5. Ackerman (D)               Nay       Yea
6. Flake (D)                  Nay       Yea
7. Manton (D)                 Yea       Nay
8. Nadler (D)                 Nay       Yea
9. Schumer (D)                Nay       Yea
10. Towns (D)                 Nay       Yea
11. Owens (D)                 Nay       Yea
12. Velazquez (D)             Nay       Yea
13. Molinari (R)              Yea       Yea
14. Maloney (D)               Nay       Nay
15. Rangel (D)                Nay       Yea
16. Serrano (D)               Nay       Yea
17. Engel (D)                 Nay       Yea
18. Lowey (D)                 Nay       Yea
19. Kelly (R)                 Nay       Yea
20. Gilman (R)                Nay       Yea
21. McNulty (D)               Yea       A
22. Solomon (R)               Yea       Yea
23. Boehlert (R)              Nay       Yea
24. McHugh (R)                Yea       Yea
25. Walsh (R)                 Yea       Yea
26. Hinchey (D)               Nay       Yea
27. Paxon (R)                 Yea       Yea
28. Slaughter (D)             Nay       Nay
29. LaFalce (D)               Yea       Nay
30. Quinn (R)                 Yea       A
31. Houghton (R)              Nay       Nay


KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule  ; VIETNAM; LAOS;

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For a City's War Heroes, Salutes Cast in Metal and Set in Stone

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 31;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 588 words


With generals and doughboys, pilots and sailors, eagles and globes, the city
remembers those who have fought in the nation's wars. Scattered through the five
boroughs, more than 300 memorials under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Parks and Recreation recall history from the American Revolution through the
Vietnam War. Jonathan Kuhn, the director of art and antiquities for the
Department of Parks and Recreation, said that "to know the monuments collection
is to know the neighborhoods." Here are some he finds notable.   Lawrence Van
Gelder

The Bronx

Victory Memorial Column (World War I)

Coronthian column surmounted by a bronze victory figure in Pelham Bay Park at
Pelham Parkway and Eastern Boulevard


Victory Memorial (World War I)

A bronze sculptural group on Mosholu Parkway at Marion Avenue

Bronx River Soldier (Civil War)

Granite figure with musket by John Grignola on Bainbridge Avenue at East 208th
Street in Norwwood.

Brooklyn

The Carroll Park Memorial (World War I)

Pink granite with bronze reliefs of soldiers and sailors by Eugene Morahan,
Court and President Streets

The Dover Patrol Monument (World War I)

A granite obelisk by Sir Astor Webb. A tribute to comradeship and service of th
American naval forces in Europe, it is identical to ones in England and France.
In Fort Hamilton Park at Shore Road in Bay Ridge

Maryland Memorial (Revolutionary War)

Corinthian column with globe in Prospect Park on Lookout hill.

Prison Ship Martyrs' Memorial (Revolutionary War)

Doric column and terrace with steps, Fort Greene Park, Myrtle to Dekalb Avenues.


Soldiers and Sailors Arch (Civil War)

Monumnetal Arch, Grand Army Plaza

Henry Warnes Slocum (Civil War)

Equestrian statue on pedestal, Grand Army Plaza

Manhattan

Nathan Hale (Revolutionary War)

Bronze statue on granite pedestral in City Hall Park, Broadway and Murray Street


The Marquis de Lafayette shaking hand with George Washington (Revolutionary War)

Statue by Frederick Bartholdi, Manhattan Avenue and 114th Street

George Washington

Equestrian statue in bronze by Henry Kirk Brown, pedestal by Richard Upjohn,
Union Square

General Daniel Butterfield (Civil War)

Bronze sculpture by John Gutzon Borglum, Sakura Park, Claremont Avenue and West
122d Street.

Admiral David Glasgow Farragut (Civil War)

Bronze statue by August St. Gaudens on low relief base by Stanford White, north
end of Madison Square Park, near 26th Street.

Abdingdon Square Doughboy (World War I)

Bronze statue by Philip Martiny at Eighth Avenue, West 12th and Hudson Streets

Maine Monument (Spanish-American War)

Nine figures, 44 feet high, by Attilio Piccirilii, southwest corner of Central
Park, at Eighth Avenue and 59th Street.

Vietnam War Memorial

Wall of glass block with inscribed text, Veterans Plaza at 55 Water Street,
beteween Coenties Slip and Broad Street

Korean War Memorial

Black granite obelisk, Battery Park, north of Castle Clinton.

Battery Park Cannon (Revolutionary War)

Mounted cannon, Battery Park, south end.

Queens

Victory Figure(Civil War)

Statue by Frederick W. Ruckstuhl, Maj. John Mark Park, Hillside Avenue and 173d
Street

The Long Island War Memorial (WWI)

Granite stele by Gaetano Cecere, East River at 19th Street and 25th Avenue.

Staten Island

The Hiker (Revolutionary War, Civil War and World War I)

Bronze statue on granite base by Allen Newman, Tomkinsville Park in St. George

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Monumental Arch, Grand Army Plaza; Abingdon Square Doughboy;
Maine Monument; Nathan Hale Monument.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Debts of Honor

BYLINE: By Douglas E. Kneeland;      Douglas E. Kneeland was a reporter and
editor at The New York Times for 22 years. This is adapted from his column in
The Lincoln News, a weekly newspaper.

SECTION: Section 1;     Page 21;     Column 3;     Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: LINCOLN, Me.


For much of the nation, it seems, Memorial Day has come to mean the unofficial
start of summer, a holiday to spend at the beach or in the backyard. In small
towns in this part of the country, however, people still feel deeply their
obligations to the past. And there aren't many of us who don't willingly
remember and honor our dead, whether they died in the service of their country
or simply succumbed to illness or age.

I was about to describe the holiday as somber, and in an obvious way it is that.
But there's also a certain joy in the sense of continuity and fulfillment that
comes with pausing to pay tribute to those who have gone before.

Today, I'm thinking about someone in particular: Gary Gordon, a young man who
left this town, his hometown (and mine), to join the Army in 1978, when he was
18 years old.

Lincoln is a pulp-and-paper mill town and shopping center of 5,500 tucked among
the fir forests and spring-fed lakes of northern Penobscot County. Gary attended
the local high school and was a running back on the football team. He wasn't in
the starting line-up, but he always gave his best. He liked to draw and doodle
and sometimes his teachers thought he did too much of it in class. His mother,
Betty, says his favorite subjects for drawing were military -- guns and tanks
and things. That could have been a hint of his later career path, but in the
years of the Vietnam War a lot of young boys were attracted to the military.

Still, Gary's interest may have surpassed that of the others. He liked to read
and regularly rode his bike to the library to borrow books. A while back a
friend of Gary's was seeking some information on the Medal of Honor at the
library and found what he was looking for in an Army Information Digest pamphlet
published in 1962 on the shelf. Checking the card in the back, he discovered
that the last person to take out the publication had been Gary Gordon, on Oct.
1, 1971.

On Oct. 3, 1993, 22 years and two days after he borrowed that pamphlet, Master
Sgt. Gary Gordon of the Army's elite Delta Force died along with 17 other
Americans in a battle in Mogadishu, Somalia. (Seventy-five soldiers were
wounded.)

He and his partner, Sgt. 1st Class Randy Shughart of Newville, Pa., were lowered
down from a helicopter in the midst of the battle and killed as they sought to
rescue wounded members of the crew of another helicopter that had been shot
down. The pilot of the downed craft, Chief Warrant Officer Michael Durant,
survived (he was captured, but later released), and said not long after,
"Without a doubt, I owe my life to these two men and their bravery."

In a ceremony at the White House on May 23d last year, President Clinton awarded
Medals of Honor posthumously to Gary and Randy "for conspicuous gallantry and
intrepidity at the risk of life above and beyond the call of duty." The medals
were given to their widows, Carmen Gordon and Stephanie Shughart. Gary's
children, Ian and Brittany, were there, as were his parents, Duane and Betty
Gordon. These are the only Medals of Honor that have been awarded for acts of
valor committed in the years since the Vietnam War.

Perhaps this is a good place to say something about the history of the medal.
Established July 1862 by an act of Congress, it is our nation's highest military
honor as well as the first to be given. Until that time, Americans hadn't
thought much about rewarding their military forces, but as tales of heroism
began to emerge from the battles of the Civil War, politicians in Washington
responded to a growing public sentiment for recognition of outstanding heroism.

The first six were presented on March 25, 1863, to survivors of a Union Army
raiding party that had slipped into Georgia in civilian clothes in April 1862 to
sabotage the Confederate rail link between Atlanta and Chattanooga.

All told, there are slightly more than 3,400 Medals of Honor on the books for
the 132-odd years of its history, about half of those given for heroism during
the Civil War, a time when brutal hand-to-hand fighting was the rule rather than
the exception. World War I produced 96 winners; World War II, 432; Korea, 131,
and Vietnam, 238.

In one corner of Duane and Betty Gordon's living room, there's a small display
of a flag that flew over the Army compound in Mogadishu, one of Gary's green
berets and other mementos of his military career. A drawing he did a few months
before he was sent to Somalia, in August 1993, has a prominent place on the
wall. The precise detailing of men in battle with a helicopter hovering in the
background lowering reinforcement troops on ropes sometimes makes his parents
wonder whether Gary had a premonition of his fate.

"It would have been really weird if there'd only been two of them," said his
mother, noting that the drawing shows three men coming down the ropes, not two
as when Gary and Randy made the drop.

On Oct. 14, 1993, Gary Gordon was brought home to Lincoln. "I was overwhelmed
when I came into town that night and saw the crowd downtown in the rain and the
cold," Betty said. Her eyes moist, she added, "You raise a child and then
suddenly you're sitting in a car alone . . ."

She said some people ask why Gary wasn't buried at Arlington National Cemetery,
outside of Washington. She tells them: "He didn't want to be. He wanted to be
brought home here."

So he came home to lie in the cemetery on West Broadway, not far from the center
of town and the library where he borrowed books on battles and the Medal of
Honor.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bikers' Tribute

SECTION: Section 1;     Page 10;     Column 1;     National Desk

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thousands of Harley Davidson motorcycle riders were in
Washington yesterday to attend the eighth annual Rolling Thunder tribute to
those who died or were missing in action in the Vietnam War. They were riding to
the Reflecting Pool and the Vietnam War Memorial. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Angel Fire Journal;
From One Man's Loss, Comfort for Thousands

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: ANGEL FIRE, N.M., May 28


Dwight Perry has scarcely slept through the night since the Vietnam War. Last
week he wasn't sleeping at all. So he left his Albuquerque home at 5 A.M. on
Friday and drove three hours north to visit a white chapel surrounded by
mountains and talk to an old man who understood his pain.

"Dr. Westphall has always had open arms for me," said Mr. Perry, who is 46.
"He's always had time to listen. He's like a second father to me."

The first six times Mr. Perry visited the D.A.V. Vietnam Veterans National
Memorial in Angel Fire, he did not go inside. "I was afraid to bring those
wounds up," he said. "But then I finally went in and met Dr. Westphall. Now I
come back here whenever I need to."

Dr. Victor Westphall, an 82-year-old man standing a little over five feet tall,
is as much a part of the memorial as the chapel and the visitors center built
into the hills of the Moreno Valley here. In fact, he began building the Vietnam
Veterans Peace and Brotherhood Chapel on his property during the summer of 1968,
just a few months after one of his sons, Lieut. Victor David Westphall 3d, then
28, was killed in the Tet offensive of the Vietnam War.

"Building this memorial in 1968 was totally unpopular, but something needed to
be done," said Dr. Westphall, a retired private builder who earned a doctorate
in history from the University of New Mexico in the 1950's.

His monument to what he terms the "tragedy and futility of war" nearly ran out
of money in the mid-1970's. That is when the Disabled American Veterans, based
in Cold Springs, Ky., stepped in and and began financing and operating it. Dr.
Westphall lives in an apartment in the back of the visitors center. He takes his
role as "director emeritus" seriously and personally greets many of the 60,000
to 70,000 people who stop each year. "I make it a point to talk to most of the
Vietnam veterans," he said. "I try to be here for them."

When asked how many veterans he had met in the last 27 years, he said: "Oh, I
don't know. Maybe half a million."

As Dr. Westphall sat at his desk in a little office in the visitors center
today, on the wall behind him hung a photograph of his son in full Marine
uniform. Several paintings of the memorial and David adorn the office walls,
along with some American Indian art.

Dr. Westphall brings visiting veterans back to this office when they want to
talk -- and cry -- privately. "Otherwise, I just talk to them wherever they
happen to be, whether it's the chapel, the visitors center or on the grounds,"
he said.

The memorial, on 26 acres among the rolling hills, has walls shaped like wings
that come together 50 feet in the air. Inside the nondenominational chapel is an
iron Peace and Brotherhood Symbol whose three cactus-like arms each hold
electric candlelight. A hat, boots and an army jacket lie among the items
visitors have left by the symbol.

Dr. Westphall said Vietnam veterans feel comfortable coming here, talking with
him and sharing their pain. "When they came home, by and large they were not
very well greeted," he said. "When they learn that someone cared enough in 1968
to build a chapel, that puts things in a different light."

About one-third of the memorial's annual visitors come during the Memorial Day
weekend, said Mike Peters, general manager of the memorial and a Vietnam
veteran. "We are expecting 16,000 to 20,000 visitors," he said last week.

A few days ago, a tent city was set up about a mile from the memorial. Large
American and P.O.W./M.I.A. flags flutter above a meadow filled with tents and
campers.

"This is my 13th year in a row coming here," said Ric Salas, a Vietnam veteran
from Albuquerque who was talking with friends by his 1964 Ford truck. "A lot of
us come early for the brotherhood, the fishing and to see Dr. Westphall. I love
that man for what he's done for Vietnam vets, and so does everyone else here."

Floyd Kitchen leaned against a cushion in his trailer and tried to explain why
he has made the drive from Harrison, Neb., every Memorial Day weekend for the
last 15 years.

"I spent five years in a veterans hospital for post-traumatic stress syndrome,"
he said. "And while I was trying to get healed by these high-powered Government
programs, I would come here and talk to Dr. Westphall for hours. He gave me
ideas to use to make my life better, to deal with my anger and guilt. He has
helped thousands, thousands, of Vietnam vets."

Thousands of tourists stop at the memorial while visiting the village of Angel
Fire, a community of 500 people and 800 homes, many of them belonging to
retirees, about 25 miles from Taos. For these tourists, the snow-covered
mountains and peaceful valleys of northern New Mexico are the reason for the
trip; the memorial is often an unexpected and moving surprise.

But to veterans, the D.A.V. Vietnam Veterans National Memorial is the
destination.

Kenneth Rhoads rode his motorcycle to the memorial from Morton, Tex., with his
17-year-old daughter Brandi on the back. "Sometimes the memories of Vietnam get
overwhelming," he said. "But I always feel better, more at peace, when I leave
this place."

Several thousand visitors, many of them bikers, milled about the chapel and
visitors center today, a cold and rainy day, as Dr. Westphall greeted many of
them and talked with his wife, Jeanne, 79, and son Douglas. Later, during a
service in the chapel, Dr. Westphall spoke of his trip to Vietnam last year to
visit the site where his son was ambushed and killed. The several hundred people
on hand gave him a standing ovation when he began his remarks, and another when
he finished.

Afterward, the group walked to a spot outside where Dr. Westphall had scattered
soil he brought back from the place in Vietnam where his son died. There, they
unveiled a marble monolith. The soil was from the Vietnamese town of Con Thien,
which Dr. Westphall was told means "Place of the Angels." He had also taken soil
from Angel Fire to scatter in Con Thien. The earth from the two "angels," he
noted with a touch of reverence, had the same reddish-brown color.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Victor Westphall at the Peace and Brotherhood Symbol inside
the veterans memorial, which he built after his son was killed in Vietnam. (Cary
Herz for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

2-Edged Sword: Asian Regimes On the Internet

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1516 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


Tran Ba Thai sits among tangles of computer wire in his dingy Hanoi office,
hoping that he can continue to connect this long-isolated nation to the distant
reaches of cyberspace.

So far, the aging Communists who run Vietnam have gone along with Mr. Thai's
plans for Net Nam, the first commercial service plugging Vietnam into the global
web of computer networks known as the Internet. But Mr. Thai, a 44-year-old
computer scientist with Vietnam's Institute of Information Technology, worries
that as Vietnam's electronic postmaster, he may be walking a line as thin as a
strand of computer wire.

While the Internet holds the promise of bolstering Vietnam's economy by
connecting this impoverished nation to the information superhighway, it also
means that Vietnam might soon be deluged with the sort of information that the
Government has long sought to keep out of the public's hands: the writings of
Vietnamese dissidents, reports by human rights groups, pornography.

"I'm sure the Government is concerned about this," Mr. Thai said. "But the
Government knows that the advantages of this system are bigger than the
disadvantages. Vietnam has been totally isolated, and the Internet is the
fastest, cheapest way to reintegrate Vietnam into the world."

The cyberspace revolution may have been born in the computer labs of the West,
but its impact will be felt most intensely in the authoritarian nations of Asia,
the continent that is home to two-thirds of the world's population and its
fastest-growing economies.

And Asian governments are vowing to do what they can to control the Internet.
Last week, the iron-fisted Government of Singapore announced that it would
prosecute anyone who posted defamatory or obscene material on the Internet.
China is expected to restrict access by keeping the cost of local Internet
service artificially high.

But it will be impossible to shut off the Internet completely, short of cutting
telephone lines and confiscating computers -- solutions that are not feasible in
countries that are trying to build modern, technologically advanced economies.
Information moves over the Internet so rapidly and uncontrollably that in many
countries, censorship could be a thing of the past.

While most Asian governments have no affection for the concept of freedom of
speech, their disdain for the free flow of information is tempered by the
understanding that the future of the world's economy will depend on computers --
and the transfer of information, including financial data and mail, over
computer networks. Their economic vitality may depend on having a population
that is computer literate and, more specifically, Internet literate.

And so China, Vietnam, Indonesia, Singapore and Malaysia, which strictly censor
every other form of information available to the public, have been forced to
open the information floodgates with the Internet, even though that means
allowing everything from political dissent to pornography to go on line.

"For authoritarian governments, it's going to be a losing game to try to control
this," said Anthony M. Rutkowski, executive director of the Internet Society, a
nonprofit organization in Reston, Va. An estimated 200,000 computers in Asia are
now connected to the Internet, a number that is expected to grow exponentially
over the next several years. According to the Internet Society, there are now
more than 15,000 computers hooked up to the Internet in Hong Kong, more than
8,000 in Singapore, more than 3,000 in Thailand and more than 500 in China.

Most computers are found at universities, government offices and in the offices
of large corporations, although increasingly -- especially in prosperous areas
of Hong Kong and Singapore -- computers are found at home, used for everything
from word processing to computer games. But given the shortage of reliable
telephone lines outside major cities, the Internet is largely an urban
phenomenon in Asia.

Among Asia's authoritarian nations, only North Korea and Myanmar, formerly
Burma, are sitting out the communications revolution for now, if only because
they are too poor to afford computers and the telephone equipment needed to
reach the network.

Internet service made its debut in China only two years ago, but there are
already at least eight Internet servers there, including a commercial service
available to the general public that was established in cooperation with Sprint,
the American telecommunications company. The servers allow a computer hookup to
the Internet through a local telephone number.

In January, Beijing announced that it would create a nationwide computer network
linking more than 100 college campuses to the Internet, even though students at
those same campuses were the center of political dissent before the violent 1989
crackdown in Tiananmen Square.

The Communist Government of Vietnam is allowing Internet servers to open for
business, even though it has already had difficulty controlling the deluge of
electronic mail from dissidents living abroad.

Some fervently anti-Communist Vietnamese dissidents in Southern California have
tried to flood the personal electronic mail box of the Prime Minister of
Vietnam, Vo Van Kiet, an early advocate of the Internet. That has alarmed the
operators of Net Nam, which is urging its subscribers, most of them businesses
and private organizations, to avoid transmitting "antisocial" information over
the Internet.

No country seems to be more aware of the opportunity and the threat posed by the
Internet than Singapore, the wealthy authoritarian city-state that has some of
the strictest censorship laws in Asia.

In Singapore, the Government is struck by a contradictory impulse as it tries to
establish Singapore as the communications and financial hub of Southeast Asia.
The Government talks of making Singapore "an intelligent island," and so it not
only allows the public access to the Internet, it encourages it.

The Singapore Government offers two services connecting computer users to the
Internet, and a third, private service is being formed. "The choice is either we
master the technology or it will master us," said George Yeo, the Minister of
Information and the Arts.

But what that means is that a budding Singaporean dissident need only sit down
at a computer, dial a local telephone number and type a simple instruction on
the keyboard: "soc.culture.singapore," to find a plethora of mostly anonymous
invective about the Government, along with some spirited defenses of it.

The free-wheeling criticism -- which might well have prompted a knock on the
door from the police if it had appeared in a newspaper -- is now freely
available to tens of thousands of computer users in Singapore -- and millions
around the world -- through the Internet. Playboy may be banned in Singapore,
but the magazine's centerfold can be viewed, in full color, on the World Wide
Web, an area of the Internet devoted to individually designed collections of
text, graphics and sound, ("sites" or "home pages") which are loosely linked
together.

China is reportedly planning to limit access by setting high fees for Internet
use. At a seminar in Hong Kong last week, a researcher for China's Ministry of
Posts and Telecommunications, Jiang Lintao, said that China was looking for
other ways of controlling access -- "for putting a brake on certain information
when the networks become popular." He did not elaborate.

Singapore is calling for self-policing of the system and has warned that it will
take legal action against anyone who uses the Internet to transmit pornographic
or seditious material. "We should never allow Singapore to be a source of
pornographic or incendiary broadcasts," Mr. Yeo said.

Last year, the Singapore Government acknowledged it rifled through the files of
users of Technet, one of the two Government-financed Internet providers, in
search of pornography. The search turned up a few pornographic images, leading
the Government to post a computerized warning to Technet users about
"countersocial activity."

But the sweep also alarmed foreign corporations operating in Singapore that use
the Internet for electronic mail. The companies feared that the Government might
eventually begin snooping into confidential corporate information. The Singapore
Government has since assured the companies that it has no intention of
conducting more unannounced searches.

Stewart A. Baker, the former general counsel of the National Security Council
who is now a Washington lawyer and a specialist in international
telecommunications law, said he suspected that Singapore and other governments
would crack down on the Internet through litigation against the large companies
that provide access to the system -- say, a defamation suit against a large
multinational corporation with assets in Singapore, whose employees place rude
messages about Singapore on the Internet.

"I would think there would be difficulty enforcing this against the little guys
-- the message senders -- but they will go after the big companies that carry
the messages," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

ESSAY;
Not Just Memories

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 1;     Page 21;     Column 1;     Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU


A respectful ceremony is being held here today at the National Memorial that was
the battleship Arizona.

Memorial Day is set aside to remember those killed in all our wars. But on the
golden anniversary of V-J Day, coming up on Sept. 2, we should go beyond
remembrance.

V-J + 50 years is a time to re-experience, to understand and to profit from the
greatest event of this century: the victory of the free world over the forces of
Germany's Naziism, Italy's Fascism and Japan's militaristic imperialism.

V-E Day, a nearly comparable commemoration, was botched by an Administration
eager to bolster the current Russian regime and snub the British. The historic
moment was frittered away in a vain reach for transient summit success.

Unfortunately, the moment is being lost again by a failure of vision.

The three-day event in Hawaii is being planned by the Defense Department.
Ceremonies will be held at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific; 20,000
veterans and armed service members will parade; salutes will be offered to
uniformed representatives of countries involved in or touched by the war.

The centerpiece will be the speech of the President of the U.S. aboard the
aircraft carrier Carl Vinson, with the Arizona in the background. Bill Clinton
will stand in the spotlight during three days of military pageantry, with no
other world leader present.

The event has been downgraded to the level of defense ministers. Military
bureaucrats of 47 nations have been invited (including Russia, which helped
little in defeating Imperial Japan; and Vietnam, opening the backdoor to
diplomatic relations.)

The decision not to invite the President of the Philippines (Bataan, Corregidor)
is dismaying; the absence of Britain's prime minister and the leaders of
Commonwealth and other nations that helped win the war is an affront to history;
the failure to invite the prime minister of Japan wastes an opportunity for
reconciliation.

With no world leaders invited, no political or great moral lesson will be drawn
from the victory. Little use will be made of the occasion to celebrate and
advance the cause of freedom in Asia.

Much of the thinking that led to this planned military extravaganza has been:
How can we get past this day without offending the Japanese? At first, our
embassy in Tokyo tried to rename it "Victory in the Pacific Day." With that
roundly derided, the White House now calls the day everything: V-J, Victory in
the Pacific, End of World War II Commemoration, whatever.

Let's start afresh. A celebration needs a theme. Those chosen by the Pentagon --
"Remembering the War" and "Peace at Last" -- are banal and backward-looking.
World War II was not fought to fight a war; it was fought to achieve a great
moral purpose. The theme of V-J Day should be: the victory of democracy over
tyranny, begun 50 years ago, is not yet finished.

It's fine to recall Admiral Spruance's naval genius at the Battle of Midway and
to rerun TV's "Victory at Sea," but unlike D-Day, V-J Day transcends any battle.
Commemoration of the event that defines this century is too important to be left
to the brass.

Americans should take unabashed pride now in the democracy in the Philippines,
our former colony; at the new freedom in Taiwan; closest to home, at the
statehood of Hawaii, enriching our culture.

And the U.S. should seize this opportunity to tell the world how proud we are at
the opportunity our educator-occupiers gave Japan, and how the Japanese made the
most of the V-J gift of democracy. Sure, they took advantage of our defense
umbrella to leapfrog our economy; sure, they closed their markets and invited a
trade war.

But thanks to their good sense and our exemplary occupation, Japan is a great
democracy and no threat to its neighbors. V-J + 50 is the day to suspend the
sniping and join in wonderment at how -- a half-century later -- victor and
vanquished are both winners. And to point to the day when a billion more Asians
will be free.

Remember the dead; honor the veterans; but celebrate victory by reminding the
new generation why the war was fought and how it snatched freedom from the jaws
of tyrants.

Three months remain to invite the leaders of the world to a civilian V-J
commemoration worthy of that victory.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: THE DECISION;
For Europe, Echoes of Vietnam War

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 29


For Europeans, Bosnia is the quagmire that Vietnam was for the United States
three decades ago. None of the countries providing peacekeeping soldiers to the
United Nations force in Bosnia can get out unless all of them agree to a
humiliating withdrawal in failure.

Obviously there are many differences between the United States' involvement in
Vietnam and the United Nations' involvement in Bosnia, but Britain and France,
the countries with the most troops in Bosnia, face a similar quandary. Unable to
persuade the warring parties to stop the fighting and mostly unwilling to use
force to stop them, they are now condemned to pour in more soldiers to protect
those who are already there.

The NATO alliance was willing at the most to use bombing to help, but its
leading power, the United States, has said it would only send ground troops to
Bosnia if the United Nations needed help to fight its way out and withdraw. The
irony leads to occasional bitter commentaries about Americans being willing to
fight to the last European soldier in Bosnia, but no one here seriously expects
the United States to get involved in what is clearly a losing proposition.

The United Nations has sent about 22,500 soldiers from France, Britain, Spain,
Turkey, the Netherlands, Bangladesh, Sweden and 11 other countries to Bosnia for
"humanitarian" aims. But it has not authorized them to impose an end to the
fighting, and they are in any case too lightly armed to do so.

That has condemned their mission to frustration and has left the power to
control events with the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, and his
erstwhile ally -- the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic. A conservative
French politician named Alain Juppe expressed that view in a book published two
years ago, accusing them of trying to construct a greater Serbia on the ruins of
the Bosnian multiethnic state.

"Proclaiming far and wide that France and the international community had to
restrict themselves to purely humanitarian actions, and avoiding any threat of
military intervention, was a clear message to Milosevic that he had a free hand:
'Carry on, and let us take care of the wounded,' in so many words," Mr. Juppe
wrote.

He later became Foreign Minister and, this month, Prime Minister of France, and
now he cannot merely criticize but has to decide what his country should do in
Bosnia.

Mr. Juppe and Jacques Chirac, elected President of France on May 7, have
threatened to withdraw France's 3,835 troops from Sarajevo unless the United
Nations mandate is changed to allow them to defend themselves.

But France cannot withdraw unilaterally without wrecking any chance Mr. Chirac
may have of realizing his ambition of leading the European Union into the 21st
century.

Britain and France could agree jointly to leave, and they might persuade Spain,
Sweden, and other European Union countries to pull out with them. But that would
be seen as cynical abandonment of the Bosnian civilian victims of the fighting,
whose protection is the United Nations' main reason for being there.

So diplomacy turns in circles, with the main hope of change now seen in the
face-saving possibility that Mr. Milosevic may soon agree to recognize Bosnia in
exchange for a lifting of the United Nations sanctions against his country.

Unless there is a diplomatic breakthrough toward a peace settlement, the
Europeans seem condemned to keep sending in more troops to protect the ones they
already have there.

Britain is sending in more soldiers to protect the 3,565 in Bosnia, and France
is sending an aircraft carrier and an amphibious assault force to the Adriatic
that its 3,835 soldiers in Bosnia will be able to call on for help if the Serbs
try to attack them.

The French and the British have also agreed to consolidate the deployment of the
United Nations forces. They are now scattered in locations all around Bosnia,
including the six "safe areas" -- Gorazde, Bihac, Srebrenica, Tuzla, Zepa and
Sarajevo -- where they are supposed to be protecting civilians.

After a point, though, consolidation would also limit their mission, which would
lose all justification if the United Nations soldiers became exclusively
concerned with protecting themselves.

Concern about the safety of the peacekeepers has always been the main reason for
the reluctance of United Nations officials to call in the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization for air strikes to punish the innumerable Serbian violations of
past cease-fire agreements.

After two sets of NATO air strikes against Bosnian Serb targets outside Sarajevo
last week, a nightmare came true, with United Nations soldiers handcuffed near
bomb targets and now more than 325 held hostage by the Serbs as insurance
against any further NATO bombing.

French military commanders reacted with indignation Monday, asking French news
media to mask the faces of the humiliated soldiers.

The danger of weakness was foreseen long ago, but not acted upon.  Last
December, after the United Nations backed down in the face of Serbian attacks
against Bihac, military experts met in The Hague and agreed on proposals to
expand the United Nations force and to provide it with helicopters and other
transport aircraft, and armed NATO escorts.

But six months later, nothing had happened. "Our partners at the United Nations
have been dragging their feet," said Mr. Juppe, whose new Government is again
asking its partners to provide the United Nations operation with a quick
reaction force to protect itself.

Despite the human lives that they have undoubtedly saved, the damage caused by
the performance of the United Nations and NATO in Bosnia to the peace and
stability of Europe that the allies are sworn to preserve is incalculable. Some
officials of the Clinton Administration say that it began when they failed two
years ago to get the European allies to adopt a stronger stance against Serbian
aggression, but that there is little they can do to help now.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Promises Full Effort to Account for M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 595 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


Honoring veterans in Memorial Day ceremonies, President Clinton promised today
to "leave no stone unturned" in accounting for prisoners of war and troops
missing in action in Vietnam, and he praised Hanoi for cooperating in such
efforts more "than ever before."

The President's remarks amounted to some of his most detailed -- and
conciliatory -- comments on Vietnam, as his advisers debate whether the United
States should establish full diplomatic ties with its former enemy as the next
step in accounting for missing troops and pursuing trade and economic
opportunities in Southeast Asia.

"We have worked hard and made good progress," Mr. Clinton told veterans gathered
in a tent on the South Lawn of the White House for the unveiling of a new
first-class postage stamp honoring P.O.W.'s and those missing in action. "We
have put the issue of M.I.A. cases ahead of all others in our dealings with
Vietnam, and today I am proud to say we are receiving more cooperation from
Hanoi than ever before."

The President did not mention the issue of recognition of Hanoi, and aides said
later that they did not expect any immediate decision. Some of Mr. Clinton's
diplomatic and economic advisers are pressing strongly to establish full
diplomatic ties, arguing that recent disclosures of documents by Hanoi meet the
criteria the Government has laid out during the last four years for
normalization. But others are said to be wary, concerned that such a move could
hurt Mr. Clinton, whose efforts to avoid service in Vietnam have dogged his
political career.

"I would not anticipate any decision in the next few days," said the national
security adviser, Anthony Lake. He said the Administration was just beginning to
review the latest batch of documents turned over by the Vietnamese this month to
a delegation to Vietnam and Laos led by Hershel W. Gober, Deputy Secretary for
Veterans Affairs.

Recognition faces considerable opposition from Republican Congressional leaders
like Senator Bob Dole, though it is backed by a bipartisan duo of decorated
Vietnam veterans, Senators John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, and John
McCain, Republican of Arizona, and by businesses anxious not to miss
opportunities in the world's fastest-developing region.

Mr. Clinton said "we can only imagine the pain" that families of the missing
have experienced, and added, "We know very well our obligation to them and their
families to leave no stone unturned as we try to account for their fate, and if
possible to bring them home."

In an appearance later before hundreds of other veterans at Arlington National
Cemetery, the President placed a wreath of blue irises and red and white
carnations at the white marble Tomb of the Unknowns, then bowed his head in
silent prayer. He paid tribute to the victors of World War II by pledging in
this 50th anniversary year to "rededicate ourselves to the vision for which they
lived."

"Generations before ours met challenges to democracy and freedom, defeated the
threats of Fascism and Communism, and now it is for us to rise to the new
challenges posed by the forces of darkness and disintegration in this age, at
home and abroad," Mr. Clinton said, echoing language he has used in several
contexts since the Oklahoma City bombing.

But he made no mention of the rising conflict in Bosnia that bedeviled his
senior foreign policy advisers throughout the weekend as they reviewed options
for dealing with the hostage-taking of United Nations peacekeepers there after
NATO air strikes pressed by the Administration last week.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the Vietnam Memorial, a billboard-sized version of the new
32-cent stamp honoring prisoners of war. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Fight Over Food Cart Wealth;
City Tries to End Multiple Permits

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1444 words


Frank Cissio has been in and out of the food business since 1945 -- restaurants,
supermarkets, delis, whatever. His coup came in the early 1980's, when he heard
that the city was preparing to slap a limit of 3,000 on the total number of
permits to run food-vending stands -- less than a quarter of the previous
number.

He hustled to acquire as many as possible, ending up with 200, and proceeded to
build a business based on sharply uniformed vendors and a superior hot dog, the
Hebrew National.

"My product took off," he said.

But critics, including the Mayor, say that Mr. Cissio is taking advantage of a
city-induced scarcity in the valuable permits, which like taxi medallions, are
now issued only in limited numbers. Like the companies that parlay Parks
Department permits into profit-making softball leagues, he is using a
technicality in the law to reap big profits from a public commodity.

Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani complained last week that the holder of the most
permits, Dan Rossi, who has 499, makes "millions and millions and millions of
dollars." Mr. Rossi and his colleagues say that is an exaggeration.

Before the city limited the total number of permits, individuals or corporations
could buy as many from the city as they wanted. Moreover, while it is
technically illegal for holders to sell the permits, if a corporation changes
hands, control of the corporation's permits changes hands as well. And as long
as the holder violates no laws, he has the right to keep renewing the permits.

The current system has led to what the Giuliani administration sees as an unfair
ownership concentration in the city's street-corner food-vending services. So it
has decided to try to break up that concentration by reducing the number of
permits any single individual can own to exactly one.

Specifically, the administration wants to stop what is in effect the renting of
municipal food-vending permits for sums that are often many times higher than
the $200 two-year fee that the city charges for a permit. While the practice is
apparently not illegal, Deputy Mayor Peter Powers calls it wrong and
counterproductive.

"Over the years, some people were slowly but surely cornering the market," he
said. "Our goal is to get an open market out there so that the quality of food
and the price is not defined by just one group."

The vending corporations, which are banded together in a group called the Big
Apple Food Vendors Association, said their own statistics show that in 1994, 43
corporations held 48 percent of the permits; by comparison, in 1983, 85
corporations held just 13.5 percent. Experts say some of the corporations in
effect charge fees for the use of their permits that range from $4,000 to $8,000
over a two-year period.

Though the law specifically forbids the leasing of permits, it does not prohibit
the leasing of carts. And since the carts are valueless without permits
attached, they come as part of the same package. "It's cute," said Gabriel
Taussig, chief of the administrative law division in the New York City Law
Department.

Food carts drew attention last year when vendors demonstrated to protest the
enforcement of an 11-year-old law limiting them to specific street corners in
midtown. City officials noticed that several big operators seemed to control a
surprisingly large proportion of what was assumed to be the ultimate small
business.

Accordingly, in February the City Council passed a law limiting permits to one
to a person beginning in 1996. As a first step, the Health Department had
planned to issue 50 permits in each borough outside Manhattan last week,
prompting long lines of vendors who were willing to wait days to escape the
sometimes exorbitant rents they now pay to corporations.

The vendors' association filed suit to defend their permits. They point out that
many of them, Mr. Rossi included, did not favor the city's initial move to limit
the total number of permits to 3,000. It was that, they say, that created the
problem. They contend they do not deserve to be penalized now by a municipal
change of direction.

Last Wednesday, a judge issued a restraining order to stop the distribution of
the permits in the four boroughs until the corporations' objections could be
heard in court. Meanwhile, he agreed to let each current holder apply for one of
the 200 permits, but said a decision on their status would await a trial on the
merits.

The city's initiative, now stalled at least temporarily, is sharply dividing the
big and little players in this fragmented but hardly small industry.

"The wagon isn't worth a penny without this decal," said Hiram Kresta, 26, who
has been a vender on Broadway for four years. "Since the city stopped issuing
new permits, people are selling them for $6,000."

Mr. Rossi aggressively defends the big guys. "Because I survived, I'm a
monopoly?" he asked. "It's impossible for a business to stay small and survive."

Opponents of the big operators say the current system holds disadvantages for
consumers. They say a person leasing a permit -- almost always as part of a deal
to rent a cart -- is often so financially stretched that he may not be able to
serve first-rate fare.

"These carts are not high quality, they're undercapitalized, they're
unattractive," said Andrew Manshell, general counsel of the Grand Central
Partnership, which recently bought four food carts of its own to set a higher
standard in the partnership's business improvement district. The new carts are
larger and cost $25,000 each -- four times the price of an ordinary cart.

Critics of the big vendors maintain that the cruelest cost is in small
operators' being priced out of a cart. "The little guy was taken out of the
business," said Councilwoman Karen Koslowitzof Queens.

But the cart-fleet owners assert that one of the principal benefits they offer
is a chance for new immigrants, or college students and others who work as
vendors, to get a leg up without having to make a big down payment. Mr. Rossi
points out that someone leasing one of his carts, including the permit, can go
to work with a payment to him that works out to as little as $6 a day.

Opponents say their studies show that fees average between $4,000 and $8,000
over two years, not including the food that many owners of carts and permits
provide at an added charge.

"The fundamental question is why should a permit secured from the city for $200
be turned around and charged to somebody for $6,000?" said Tom Cusick, president
of the Fifth Avenue Business Improvement District.

But the biggest players in the cart industry are quick to characterize
themselves as hard-working small-business men who seized an opportunity. Mr.
Rossi, who is 45, grew up in the Bronx, served two tours as a marine in Vietnam
and worked as a sheet metal apprentice. In 1980, he turned this experience into
a new business: making push carts.

"I had no intention of getting into permits," he said. "I just wanted to make
push carts."

But in 1985, he had the opportunity to buy two companies holding 399 permits and
immediately realized that the permits would enable him to lease more of the
carts he manufactured. The strategy sputtered for several years, but after the
city cracked down on counterfeit permits five years ago, it took off.

"I was in the right place at the right time, but I waited five years for it," he
said. He bought another company with 100 permits several years ago, and says he
now makes between $1 million and $2 million before taxes.

Mr. Cissio, who has owned restaurants and supermarkets, decided to get into the
push-cart business in 1982. His goal was to present a uniform image, through the
independent vendors leasing his carts. They wear yellow and red uniforms; Hebrew
National umbrellas fly from the stainless steel carts.

"I really wanted to improve the image out there," he said. "I'm a service-type
person."

He defends his permits vigorously. "What we have, we should keep," he said. "To
take it away from us would be the Communist way. What's going on here?"

Another story is that of Christopher Ferencsik, the vice president of the Big
Apple Food Vendors Association. In the 1980's, he operated 80 ice cream carts he
bought from Good Humor, permits included, before selling out to Schrafft's
Sedutto in 1990. Schrafft's Sedutto has since gone bankrupt, so Mr. Ferencsik
may get the carts back.

Mr. Ferencsik argues that limiting permits to one to a person effectively limits
the opportunities of those the Giuliani administration most wants to help. "Is
it opportunity to operate one push cart your entire life?" he asked. "Where is
that going to lead you?"

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dan Rossi, showing off one of the food carts he manufactures at
his shop on West 45th Street in Manhattan, owns more food vendor's permits, 499,
than any other person in the city. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)(pg. B3);
New York City has limited the total number of food-vendor permits to 3,000,
making Frank Cissio, above, who has 200 permits, a veritable pushcart mogul.
(Sara Krulwich/The New York Times); Hoping for similar success, other New
Yorkers, below, waited to apply for permits at the Department of Consumer
Affairs in Jackson Heights, Queens. (Rebecca Cooney for The New York Times)(pg.
B1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 927 words



International A3-9

STRONGER U.N. FORCE IN BOSNIA
The United States, Britain, France, Germany and Russia resolved to bolster the
United Nations force in Bosnia to deter rebel Serbs from raids that have left
more than 300 peacekeepers hostages.  A1



THE DRAWBACK OF AIR STRIKES
A French officer's dilemma illustrates why the American-backed policy of using
NATO air strikes while United Nations peacekeepers are on the ground has
probably run its course in Bosnia.  A1

Serbian fighters vs. the Royal Welch Fusiliers.  A6

For Europeans, Bosnia is a Vietnam-style quagmire.  A7

SEARCH FOR QUAKE SURVIVORS
Rescuers toiled through the night to rescue victims of an earthquake feared to
have killed at least 2,000 people in Russia's Far East.  A1

FADED REVOLUTION IN IRAN
Iran has become a country of broken promises, unnerving unpredictability and
fitful repression intended to keep the Government in power and the people at
bay.  A1

President Clinton promised a full effort to account for M.I.A.'s.  A3

Family breakdown is a global phenomenon, a study finds.  A5

Mexico's governing party wins one, loses one in state elections.  A9

Tomintoul Journal: Scottish town's benefactor is behind bars.  A4

National A10-15

BUCHANAN'S INFLUENCE
While Patrick J. Buchanan is still viewed as an unlikely Presidential nominee,
the former television commentator and conservative columnist is a lot closer to
driving the race than to being driven out.  A1

SEARCHING FOR CLUES AT HARVARD
An autopsy found that the Harvard University student who killed her roommate on
Sunday before committing suicide had stabbed the other student 45 times.  A10

SCHOOL SUCCEEDS, ONLY TO CLOSE
After 76 years of success, Lindblom High in Chicago, one of the best in the city
despite being in one of the city's toughest neighborhoods, is scheduled to be
closed in a cost-cutting measure.  A10

F.B.I. AGENT AND SUSPECT ARE SLAIN
A suspect wanted in the shootings of two Washington police officers killed an
F.B.I. agent before being killed by the authorities.  A12

PROFESSOR IS CALLED SUSPICIOUS
As Federal agents investigate new evidence against the Ohio State art professor
who gave stolen leaves of a medieval manuscript to a dealer, colleagues and
former students described what they said was a pattern of suspicious behavior.
A11

A WARNING TO THE G.O.P.
The head of Focus on the Family has warned Republican leaders that if they
ignore a socially conservative agenda -- especially, opposition to abortion --
they risk losing their jobs because evangelical voters will abandon them.  A12

BLACKMUN SEES RACISM GROWING
Retired Justice Harry Blackmun told future lawyers at a commencement that amid
eroding values, racism appears to be growing in the United States.  A14

LAST BODIES FOUND IN OKLAHOMA
Three bodies were pulled from the rubble of the Oklahoma City Federal Building.
They were believed to be those of two credit union employees and a customer.
A15

Three people were killed by a tornado in the Berkshires.  A13

Metro Digest B1

DARK DAYS FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH
Biomedical research, long considered a cornerstone of American medicine,
threatens to become a casualty of the reorganization of the country's health
care system.  A1

WITNESS INTIMIDATION ON THE RISE
Coaxing people to testify at trials has always been a problem for prosecutors in
New York City. In recent years, the intimidation of witnesses has become worse
than ever.  A1

Science Times C1-10

The brain's memory system is coming into focus.  C1

Scientist at work: Dr. Martha K. McClintock, biopsychologist.  C1

An Asian invader increases the gypsy moth threat.  C1

Effort to reintroduce the thick-billed parrot fails in Arizona.  C4

Peripherals C6

Personal Computers C8

Q&A C9

Alcohol-laden cloud in space offers clues to stars.  C10

Fashion Page B7

Can a face sell a million lipsticks?

Patterns

By Design

Arts/Entertainment C13-16

Public broadcasting contemplates commercials.  C13

Nixon as seen by Oliver Stone.  C13

BBC's cultural lifeline.  C16

Music: Gorecki joins compatriots' program.  C13

Dance: "Prodigal Son." C13

Books: "Novel Without a Name," by Duong Thu Huong.  C15

TV: The anti-Darwinians.  C16

Obituaries B6

Maragret Chase Smith, first woman elected to both houses of Congress.

Edgar Scott, prominent Philadelphia investment banker.

Henning Kronstam, dancer and Danish Ballet director.

Business Digest D1

Sports B8-14

Auto Racing: One race but two changed lives.  B14

Baseball: The sport is losing ground by the minute.  B9

Yanks fall to Mariners, 8-7.  B9

Mets lose in 13th.  B11

Basketball: Pacers get even.  B9

Drexler's quest.  B14

Columns: Berkow on basketball.  B9

On Baseball.  B11

Hockey: Rangers seek the right mix.  B12

Bring on Lindros.  B12

Racing: You and I wins.  B14

Tennis: Favorites fare well.  B12

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Saving the U.N. in Bosnia.

"Tags" to help catch bombers.

The trashman cometh.

Susanna Rodell: Rehearsals.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Why only Bosnia?

Russell Baker: Tapping the stones.

Carol Muske Dukes: When "the system" worked.

Chronicle D16

Chess C9

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Subic Bay Rises as an Industrial Hotbed

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: SUBIC BAY, the Philippines


When the United States left its largest military base in Asia in 1992 -- with
the pointed encouragement of the Philippine Government -- some here thought the
future of the area was departing, too.

With the memory still fresh of the looting that followed the American
abandonment in 1991 of nearby Clark Air Base, there seemed little hope that much
would be made of Subic Bay Naval Station. A total of 42,000 Filipinos lost their
jobs at the base with the American departure, and the region's surrounding
economy was deprived of hundreds of millions of dollars in spending by American
sailors and marines.

But Richard J. Gordon, the mayor of the neighboring town of Olongapo, was
determined to make use of the substantial resources left behind: thousands of
acres of dockyards, housing, an airfield, beaches and jungle. He wanted to
create a zone for economic growth and development that could serve as a model
for the rest of the country.

And, apparently, he has succeeded. Today, investors are pouring into Subic Bay,
lured by the infrastructure of roads, buildings and other facilities left behind
by the Americans; by the skilled English-speaking work force and by the absence
of duties. Taxes, while not the lowest in Southeast Asia, are a flat 5 percent
of gross revenues. So far, nearly 19,000 jobs have been created in the
free-trade zone that Mr. Gordon oversees as chairman of the Subic Bay
Metropolitan Authority.

Duty- or trade-free zones exist elsewhere in Asia, most commonly in China, where
the country's overall economy is substantially regulated.  Some of the Chinese
zones, like the one in Shenzhen across the border from Hong Kong, have proved
wildly successful locales for foreign and domestic investment, while the zone in
Xiamen in Fujian province has floundered.

Vietnam, too, has created several economic zones, including an export-processing
zone in the north, but has not yet attracted much foreign investment. Sri Lanka,
by contrast, has seen its export-processing zone near the airport in Colombo
thrive with substantial investment from Asian garment manufacturers.

But, as Annabel Betz, an economist at Baring Securities (Hong Kong) Ltd., noted,
"Nothing is as high-profile as Subic."

The Federal Express Corporation will begin using Subic as its Asian hub in July,
and the Enron Corporation, an American energy company, has built a power plant
here that sells electricity to Manila. The Coastal Corporation has chosen Subic
as an Asian transshipment point and has taken a 35-year lease on the oil storage
tanks here.

Asian companies, though, are making up the bulk of investors here, from Sheng
Guard Company Ltd., a small Taiwan cookware company, to Acer, Taiwan's largest
manufacturer of computers. A Malaysian hotel group has established a hotel and
casino complex and a young Australian has started a bungee-jumping business from
an old naval crane.

Wong Wen Chieh oversees the manufacture of telephones for Thomson Audio
Philippines, a division of the French multinational Thomson S.A. "We started
operations in November," he said. "Initially we had 150 people, now we have 640.
We hope to get up to 3,000."

Mr. Wong said Thomson was drawn by the supply of highly trained technicians and
engineers in the Philippines but came with a memory of the country's past
instability. Skepticism was quickly overcome, though, he said, and "now, we're
talking about phase 2, to build a new high-end facility here."

One measure of the economic zone's appeal is the speed with which tenants
gobbled up space in its first of three light industrial parks.

"We opened to the public last October," said Cheng Hsien-jung, president of the
local development office that manages the three parks. "By the end of March we
were fullly booked, 52 companies. The first few investors we gave some
incentives, but after that no.

"I would say there's no comparison with any other industrial park in Asia,"
added Mr. Cheng, a Taiwanese investment banker. "Here there is a first-quality
airport, a first-quality port. You have roads, power. In mainland China, you
have to start from scratch. Here you have everything."

Ultimately, Mr. Cheng said, $181 million in investments should pour into the
park, creating an estimated 20,000 jobs on space that American servicemen once
used as a skeet-shooting range.

One of the largest investors here is Federal Express, which will use Subic's
airfield at Cubi Point as its Asian hub beginning in July.

"Subic offers us a number of things," said Cliff Deeds, the managing director
for market development and communications. "Geographically, it's centrally
located within Asia, which allows us to hook up North America to our Asia
network. It has a substantial infrastructure. It has not only a deep water bay,
it has 24-hour airport capability. It has its own power generator plant, which
insures an uninterrupted power supply. It has a free-trade zone. The operating
costs there are competitive with other ports in the region."

Subic also draws local start-ups attracted by the benefits or simply fleeing the
crime and poor business conditions prevalent elsewhere in the country. "We
haven't had a mugging, certainly no rapes, no shootings," said Leo H. Larkin,
who opened a leather-goods factory with his wife, Leila. "We just don't have
that here.

"We were experiencing 4-, 6-, 8-hour brownouts in Manila," he added. "We decided
this was the place -- a good source of labor, power, everything. We came with 38
people and in 19 months we have 276 people."

Mr. Gordon, the Mayor of Olongapo, is neither shy about his accomplishments nor
his ambitions. He was appointed by the Philippine President, Fidel V. Ramos, to
a six-year term as chairman of the Subic authority. But Mr. Gordon, a member of
an opposition party, has never denied his intention to use Subic's success as a
platform for a higher political office, even a run for the presidency.

In an office filled with the products of Subic's factories, Mr. Gordon spoke of
his plans for Subic Bay. "Basically, what people want in terms of this country
is speed," he said. "I'm going to improve the ports, build a new terminal at the
airport and we're going to build a new road to Manila.

"There are a lot of competitive countries in Asia," he said. "But in a fair
contest, the Philippines will beat anyone."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of the Philippines showing location of Subic Bay.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cannons, Salutes and Plenty of Bad Weather

BYLINE: By CAREY GOLDBERG

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words


Amid spinning batons, bellowing cannons and trembling hands raised in long
salutes, there were those who marked Memorial Day together, marching through Bay
Ridge or casting white roses into the Hudson River.

And there were those who remembered alone, like 89-year-old Leonid Tarasyuk, who
even yesterday, when he looked out beneath the lowering sky over the combed sand
of Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, thought only of mines that could so easily be
hidden close to the boardwalk.

So many of his comrades perished during his years fighting the Nazis as a
mine-sweeper in the Red Army that Mr. Tarasyuk could not recall their names. He
remembered only a scene of virtual Russian roulette that repeated itself over
and over: he and his remaining unit members would be raising a glass of vodka to
the memory of their latest friend to die, and he would ask, "So, boys, which one
of us is going to be toasted tomorrow?"

"The most holy thing a person has is memory," said another Soviet veteran,
Zinoviy Pinsky. "Nothing can be more sacred than remembering the dead."

Braving spotty showers and a clammy chill, thousands of marchers and spectators
turned out to remember the dead of America's wars yesterday -- from the 128th
annual Memorial Day service in Brooklyn, which claims to be New York City's
biggest, to the special ceremony at the museum-ship Intrepid.

In Connecticut, where 18 town parades were scheduled, thunderstorms rained out
marches planned for the afternoon, but fathers in Stratford got a chance to show
their daughters what good soldiering really means. Unwilling to give up the
chance to exhibit the cardboard tank they had worked on all night, members of a
Y.M.C.A.-run father-daughter activity group rolled through town despite the
cancellation of their parade, scattering bubble gum and hard candy to the empty
lawn chairs of the less hardy.

"There were more chairs than people, but it was still a lot of fun," said Andrea
Schraml, 9, a member of the Seminole Tribe of Indian Princesses activity group.

Most ceremonies went ahead despite the weather, but the second great tradition
of Memorial Day -- the kicking off of shoes, the kickoff of summer -- fell
notably flat.

Two full days of clouds and rain on the New Jersey shore sent many weekenders
straggling home early, hurt attendance at the Monmouth Park race track in
Eatontown and left merchants grumbling. By afternoon, the beach at Belmar was
deserted except for lifeguards and wet-suited surfers, and would-be frolickers
in the sun went home with cabin fever instead of a tan.

"We did a lot more eating and watching television," said Mark Mury, 23, of South
Orange, as he and his friends stood sadly on the Belmar boardwalk in
long-sleeved shirts and jeans. "It was miserable."

"We watched a lot of sports -- the Yankee game, the hockey playoffs, soccer,"
added his friend, Cheryl Dario of Union City.

Those who saw Memorial Day as a time for uplifting rather than for reclining
came away less disappointed.

"I felt that today I ought to give some thought to the people I served with in
the Navy who didn't come back," said John Farmer, 70, a retired accountant from
Morris Township who attended the Morristown parade. "Our ship was hit by bombs
and bullets. I've had a great life since then, but many of those people didn't
have a life after that."

The most elaborate tribute to America's war dead came at Fort Hamilton on the
southern tip of Brooklyn, where the Bay Ridge parade ended. Attended by Mayor
Rudolph W. Giuliani and Borough President Howard Golden, it was the scene of
groups carrying banners as varied as "Our Lady of Angels Daisy Girl Scout Troop"
and "Iron Workers Local 361 -- Structural Riggers and Erectors."

Junior high school bands tortured "The Caissons Go Rolling Along," and a
contingent of Soviet army veterans, their chests covered with a once-unthinkable
mix of medals ranging from bronze heads of Lenin and Stalin to American-issued
ribbons, brought up the rear.

If there was a difference this year from the last 127, it was the popular
emphasis on fighting budget cuts that could hurt the former soldiers whom the
ceremony honors.

A Vietnam veteran, George Young, spent much of the ceremony passing out hundreds
of prewritten letters to New York's Congressional delegation asking them to
fight cuts that could hurt veterans' hospitals and other benefits.

"We are the first to fight, the first to die, the first to be called upon to
serve our beloved country and the first to be forgotten," the letter said.

Teachers and band leaders who stepped up to greet Mr. Giuliani repeatedly asked
him not to cut funds for schools.

But for most the ceremony was not political; it was personal, a time to remember
those who fell.

"I feel that I'm honoring those we lost," said a Korean War veteran, Donald
Feldman, 65, a former purchasing agent who has found his war experiences
crowding back into his mind since he retired. "It's distressing, though, because
every year you feel more and more of a lack of interest in Memorial Day. There's
less people who want to care and remember."

That apathy was especially upsetting to veterans in the Bronx, where only about
50 people marched from Bedford Park to Mosholu Parkway and few spectators joined
them.

"They don't feel this is important," said David Levin, a Persian Gulf war
veteran, of his missing neighbors. "People should give back."

Mr. Tarasyuk, the 89-year-old Brighton Beach resident, has received enough
gratitude for a lifetime, even his very long one, including seven personal notes
of thanks from Stalin himself. But the thanks can do little to offset the
personal price he paid in World War II.

Asked whom he remembered on Memorial Day, the spry octogenarian could not answer
right away, and his wise tortoise eyes turned an instant bloodshot red as he
looked out at the hazy gray sea.

"His four children and wife died in Odessa," explained Mr. Tarasyuk's new wife
of six years, Chana Shmushkis. "That's why it brought such a spasm."

Mr. Tarasyuk fought through Budapest, Vienna and the Alps and on to the Elbe
River, where Soviet and American troops linked up in 1945. In his team of eight
sappers, clearing mines and securing buildings, someone seemed to die every day
and be replaced. A sapper, the professional joke went, only ever makes one
mistake.

"Some died and some remained, and I remained," he said, the bafflement of it
still in his eyes after 50 years. "To me it will always be a miracle."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: On the museum ship Intrepid, white roses framed the United
States Navy Salute Team, which later fired a 21-gun salute. (Ozier Muhammad/The
New York Times); In the Bronx, top, Thomas Lopez, 67, a Korean War veteran and
member of the National Congress of Puerto Rican Veterans, honored the dead,
after a Memorial Day parade from the Grand Concourse to Mosholu Parkway. (Andrew
Lichtenstein for The New York Times); Above, Soviet Army veterans showed off
their medals at an observance in Doubleday Park in Brooklyn and reminisce over
their many battles with the Nazis in World War II. (Linda Rosier/The New York
Times)(pg. B5); A veteran at a solemn moment at services in Peekskill, N.Y.
(Chris Maynard for The New York Times)(pg. B1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
A Novel in the Tunnels Of the North Vietnamese

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 857 words


NOVEL WITHOUT A NAME
By Duong Thu Huong
Translated by Phan Huy Duong and Nina McPherson. 292 pages. William Morrow &
Company. $23.

One of the most striking things about this new novel by Duong Thu Huong -- one
of Vietnam's most popular writers and better known dissidents -- is just how
closely it resembles many American novels about the Vietnam War. Not only does
"Novel Without a Name" turn the conventional Bildungsroman into a tale of
disillusionment, like such American works as Rob Riggan's "Free Fire Zone" and
Stephen Wright's "Meditations in Green," but it also uses a disjointed time
sequence, reminiscent of works like Nicholas Proffitt's "Gardens of Stone," to
try to convey the war's disorienting, surreal effect.

Indeed, the generically titled "Novel Without a Name" underscores the
commonality of the war experience, even as it creates a detailed portrait of
guerrilla life in the jungles of Southeast Asia.

When we first meet Ms. Huong's narrator, Quan is a 28-year-old soldier who has
spent the last decade in the North Vietnamese Army. Quan left his village when
he was 18, filled with bright, shining hopes and lots of idealistic fervor.
"This war was not simply another war against foreign aggression," he recalls
thinking. "It was also our chance for a resurrection. Vietnam had been chosen by
History: After the war, our country would become humanity's paradise. Our people
would hold a rank apart. At last we would be respected, honored, revered."

Years of tramping through the jungle and burying his dead compatriots, however,
have seriously tarnished Quan's expectations, in much the same way, it seems,
that Ms. Huong's own experiences in wartime and postwar Vietnam led to her own
disillusionment with the Government and her own youthful ideals. No longer does
Quan dream of glory and heroics; rather, the war has become for him a daily
matter of survival: of finding enough food (rice, plants, even grubs) to stave
off malnutrition, of dodging bullets and bombs, of trying to escape the grim
realities of war by retreating, like Tim O'Brien's hero in "Going After
Cacciato," into the world of dreams and memories.

In fact, Ms. Huong creates narrative tension in "Novel Without a Name" by
cutting back and forth between Quan's current travails and his idyllic boyhood,
between the noble anti-imperialist struggle depicted by Communist Party
officials and the grim horror of jungle combat.

Unlike most American soldiers who were in Vietnam for one-year tours of duty,
Quan and his compatriots fight on without any end in sight, save a crippling
injury or death. The constant fear and weariness seem to have driven one of
Quan's best friends completely mad. Once a big, hearty soldier, Bien is now an
emaciated wreck who hurls himself at barbed wire and concrete walls, and sings
sad nonsense songs to himself. Quan is assigned by another childhood friend
named Luong, who is now deputy commander of their division, to look into Bien's
case; after checking and making his report, Luong says, Quan should take a short
leave and use the time to visit their home village.

The long journey home, told in a succession of episodic takes that turn Quan
into a sort of resolutely nonmythic Ulysses, introduces the reader to a series
of subsidiary characters: a lonely female soldier who implores Quan to sleep
with her; a young soldier who lost his way in the jungle and apparently starved
to death; a party official who complains that young people are "out for their
own interests, never the glory of the party." Later on the reader meets Quan's
sourpuss father; a naive, introspective recruit who meets a brutal death; a
conscienceless con man, and more pompous bureaucrats.

None of these characters are particularly well drawn. In fact, the entire
supporting cast of "Novel Without a Name" verges on stereotype or caricature, a
problem that is not helped by the fact that the language, at least as translated
by Phan Huy Duong and Nina McPherson, often feels stilted and cliched.

What does hold the reader's interest, what ultimately makes this novel affecting
despite its flaws, is Ms. Huong's ability to convey Quan's state of mind and the
overwhelming sense of loss he feels -- at the advanced age of 28 -- in looking
back over his life. The death of his beloved younger brother, whom his father
forced into the army; the demise of his love for his childhood sweetheart, who
has become pregnant with another man's child; the sight of dozens of his
comrades in arms killed, maimed and emotionally damaged; the realization that
much of the Government's talk of building a people's paradise has been nothing
but propaganda. These are just some of the things that have insured Quan's own
loss of innocence, innocence he now realizes is forever irretrievable in the
wake of the war.

As he puts it: "We never forget anything, never lose anything, never exchange
anything, never undo what has been. There is no way back to the source, to the
place where the pure, clear water once gushed forth. The river had cut across
the countryside, the towns, dragging refuse and mud in its wake."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Duong Thu Huong (Timothy Karr/NYT Pictures/William Morrow)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Stone's Nixon Is a Blend Of Demonic And Tragic

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, May 29


As the movie cameras rolled and the director Oliver Stone watched intensely,
Richard M. Nixon, played by Anthony Hopkins, responded to the first news of the
Watergate break-in. The setting was a staff meeting in the President's hideaway
office in the Executive Office Building, next to the White House.

"I don't have time for all this," he said impatiently, looking at his watch and
turning to his aide, Bob Haldeman (James Woods). "Just handle it, Bob! Keep it
out of the White House. What else? Kissinger's waiting; he's throwing a tantrum,
threatening to quit again if I don't see him." Mr. Hopkins sighed.

Moments later, Mr. Hopkins and Mr. Stone conferred quietly over the scene, which
takes place in the first few minutes of "Nixon," a sweeping drama, now being
filmed, about one of the more enigmatic and extraordinary politicians of the
century. The $42 million film is to be released by the Walt Disney Company later
in the year or early in 1996.

The fact that Mr. Stone, a Hollywood-style radical and the town's bad boy, is
turning his focus on Nixon may lead some to assume that the film is a demonic
portrait of the nation's 37th President. After all, Mr. Stone has relished his
role as an anti-Vietnam War and anti-Government film maker in such works as
"Platoon" and "Born on the Fourth of July." His most celebrated and infamous
film was "J.F.K.," in which he raised the possibility that the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy resulted from a conspiracy at the highest Government
levels.

Surprisingly, "Nixon" seems another matter. A reading of the closely guarded
script, and conversations with Mr. Stone and some of the actors, suggests that
the film seeks to portray Nixon in a variety of ways: demonic but also tragic,
obsessed with his past, vulnerable and charismatic, frightened and hard.

"He's a classic tragic character, probably the most dominant politician in
America in the last half-century after Roosevelt," said Mr. Stone, walking
around a movie set that includes strikingly accurate replicas of the Oval
Office, the Cabinet Room and other White House sites. "The toughness that it
took for him to rise to the top as an outsider and take the knocks were the very
qualities that made him cynical and bitter and defeated him." He added:
"Actually, Nixon has always reminded me of my father. My father was a big Nixon
supporter and so was I. I went to Trinity in New York and I had fights because I
was a Nixon supporter."

The birth of the film was a difficult one. Mr. Stone broke up acrimoniously with
his longtime producer, Arnon Milchan, an Israeli-born businessman, largely over
the cost of the movie. And Warner Brothers, which has released Mr. Stone's
recent movies, was plainly reluctant to take on the project after the public and
critical reaction to the director's last two films. These were "Heaven and
Earth," a seriously flawed drama about Vietnam that collapsed at the box office,
and "Natural Born Killers," a movie that earned profits but was denounced by
many critics for its over-the-top violence.

Mr. Stone has assembled a high-profile cast for this film. Besides Mr. Hopkins,
who took the role after Tom Hanks turned it down, the film's cast includes Joan
Allen as Pat Nixon ("She looks remarkably similar, the same beautiful, fragile
bones," said Mr. Stone). Other lead actors are Powers Boothe (Gen. Alexander M.
Haig Jr.); Ed Harris (Howard Hunt); Bob Hoskins (J. Edgar Hoover); E. G.
Marshall (John Mitchell); David Paymer (Ron Ziegler); David Hyde Pierce (John
Dean); Paul Sorvino (Henry A. Kissinger); J. T. Walsh (John Erlichman), and
James Woods (H. R. Haldeman).

Also in the cast are Edward Herrmann as Nelson Rockefeller, Madeline Kahn as
Martha Mitchell, and Sam Waterston as Richard Helms. The screenplay was written
by Mr. Stone, Christopher Wilkinson and Stephen J. Rivele.

A number of former Nixon associates -- including Mr. Dean, General Haig, Mr.
Ziegler, John Sears, Leonard Garment and Elliot Richardson -- have met with the
film makers and actors. Alexander Butterfield, a former Cabinet secretary and
special assistant to Nixon who first revealed the existence of the secret tapes
that the President had made of his conversations, is the film's technical
adviser.

Mr. Butterfield, an outgoing and blunt-spoken businessman from San Diego who is
writing a book about Nixon, has been on the movie set every day and has been on
call for Mr. Stone and the actors. "Oliver has had to take some creative
license, to cut and paste, but he's been very fair," he said. One of Nixon's
closest personal aides, he said he remained utterly puzzled about Nixon's
personality. He has had numerous conversations with Mr. Hopkins, and helped the
actor especially with the way Nixon -- who died in April 1994, at the age of 81
-- spoke, behaved and gestured.

"I remember Haldeman once saying that Nixon was the strangest man he ever met,
and I felt good when he said that because I agreed," said Mr. Butterfield. "For
one thing, he gestured like no one else I ever knew. He was always a little off
balance. No finesse. So unathletic, pitifully unathletic.

"Even after his last maudlin and, in my opinion, stupid speech to his staff --
why everyone was crying I never understood because it was so fragmented, so
discombobulated -- he walked to the South Lawn and gave this almost enthusiastic
wave. It was so incongruous, like he was going on another trip. That's what was
so strange about him."

The Nixon family has remained uninvolved with the film. But Julie Nixon
Eisenhower, one of the President's two daughters, sent a note and a copy of her
1986 memoir, "Pat Nixon: The Untold Story," to Mr. Hopkins's mother, Muriel, who
visited the Nixon Library in Yorba Linda, Calif., with her son.

Mr. Hopkins, who received an Academy Award as best actor for his performance in
"The Silence of the Lambs" in 1991, said the Nixon role was the hardest of his
35-year career. Seated in his trailer during a lunch break, the actor said he
was concentrating on the Nixon voice and accent. Even off camera, Mr. Hopkins
tries to walk and talk and gesture like the former President. Yet the role seems
to torment Mr. Hopkins, who wears only a fake hair piece and false teeth to hint
at a physical resemblance to Nixon. (Mr. Stone said, "I didn't want makeup to
get in the way of his ability to allow people to look into him.")

To Mr. Hopkins, the role is almost Shakespearean. "I never feel I can get the
accent right," he said quietly. "I can do Nixon, the essence of Nixon, the
tortured man, but the technical stuff is the hardest. I've got the mask, but
it's the accent. Everyone knows what he sounded like. The voice. I've just got
to grab onto it like a fireman's pole, hold onto it and let it carry me."

"Oliver says, 'Be bold, be bold, do Nixon, just do it,' " said Mr. Hopkins, who
has watched hours of newsreels and tapes of the former President. "I feel I'm
just about keeping my head above water. I sense I know him. I sense he was run
out of his job by his own demons. I understand the rejection he felt, the
isolation. And I feel compassion for this man."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joan Allen as Pat Nixon and Anthony Hopkins as the President in
Oliver Stone's "Nixon." (Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Indochina, Tantalizing Traces of an Elusive Pig

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Science Desk;  The Environment Page

LENGTH: 369 words


THE undiscovered wildlife of central Indochina, shielded from scientists by a
half century of war and by the dense forests of the region, has begun at last to
yield its secrets, and naturalists believe they are hot on the trail of a long
lost wild pig.

Dr. George Schaller, a field biologist with the Wildlife Conservation Society,
the organization that manages the Bronx Zoo, reports that he and his colleagues
have obtained a skull and some meat from the animal, enabling them to prove that
it belongs to a species that had been regarded as extinct.

The pig, Sus bucculentis, is known in English as a Vietnamese warty pig. It came
to the attention of Western scientists through a description published in 1892
by a Jesuit priest in Shanghai. No specimens were ever available for study.

But last January, Dr. Schaller and a Laotian colleague, Dr. Kham Khoun, learned
during a field trip in eastern central Laos that local hunters sometimes killed
wild pigs that matched the priest's century-old description, a rust and yellow
animal with a long snout. The hunters gave Dr. Schaller a skull and a sample of
meat from which DNA could be extracted, and a biologist for the society, Dr.
George Amato, analyzed the DNA and concluded that the animal was neither a
Eurasian pig nor a domestic species, the only two known pig species in the
region.

"I have no doubt that the animal will turn up again, and I hope we'll be able to
look at a live one," Dr. Schaller said. "We don't offer a bounty, because we
certainly don't want to encourage hunting of any rare species."

Since 1992, naturalists have discovered two new species of ungulate in the same
border region of Laos and Vietnam -- the Vu Quang ox and a giant muntjak deer.
Last year, a Vu Quang ox was captured alive and penned in a reserve in Vietnam.
Naturalists were thrilled; the rare ox was only the seventh large mammal species
to be discovered in the world since 1900.

"This area is turning up things right and left," Dr. Schaller said, "but there's
a down side. The lovely wild forest is being cut back for human settlement, and
the habitat of many wonderful animals, certainly including some presently
unknown species, is disappearing."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
Nobody Ever Learns

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


Just turn the page, change the decade -- nobody ever learns.

The lead photo in Monday's Times of frightened French soldiers being held
hostage near Sarajevo reminded me of the young men I served with as a draftee in
the mid-1960's, at the height of the Vietnam buildup.

On my first day in boot camp at Fort Dix, I was stunned to see that the other
recruits all looked as young as I. We were like babies compared with the
tough-talking, leather-skinned veterans of the war movies we had grown up with.
This was real-life. Young boys with frightened faces heading off to the unknown.
It wasn't a John Wayne film in which an aging actor straightens out his
hairpiece, puts on his helmet and ambles out to face a 35-millimeter
pin-registered Mitchell camera.

I was lucky. While so many others went to Vietnam, including many of my closest
friends, I was sent to Korea. That's where I would get the letters saying this
friend had died, that friend had died.

"Obviously," says Robert McNamara in his book, "In Retrospect," "there are
things you cannot quantify: honor and beauty, for example. But things you can
count, you ought to count. Loss of life is one when you are fighting a war of
attrition. We tried to use body counts as a measurement to help us figure out
what we should be doing in Vietnam to win the war while putting our troops at
the least risk."

He was talking about the enemy body count. In Korea, with each sorry bit of news
that made its way to us from Vietnam, we were keeping our own body count. Young
boys with frightened faces.

Vietnam was a political and public-relations pit from which the major egos of
the era could not satisfactorily extricate themselves. In the service of those
egos, tens of thousands of young men and quite a few women had to do their duty
and allow themselves to be sacrificed.

Now, of course, we are told that Vietnam was a mistake.

Fast forward to the madness of October 1983. Ronald Reagan and his advisers,
enmeshed in a thoroughly incoherent Mideast policy, and ever ready to do
something -- anything -- that would make them appear tough, had stationed 3,000
ill-equipped and ill-defended marines in Beirut. When a suicide bomber in a
Mercedes truck blew up their barracks headquarters on a Sunday morning, 241
sailors and marines were killed.

Another mistake.

Three days later the United States invaded Grenada. "We got there just in time,"
said Robert McFarlane, Mr. Reagan's national security adviser. For Mr. Reagan it
was just in time to shift the headlines away from the debacle in Beirut. Grenada
was a public-relations coup, giving Mr. Reagan some desperately needed political
cover.

The next day, Oct. 27, the President went on national television to blame
everything on the Russians. "Not only has Moscow assisted and encouraged
violence in both countries," he said, "but it provides direct support through a
network of surrogates and terrorists."

The situation in Lebanon, Mr. Reagan insisted, was absolutely vital to United
States interests.

Not exactly. In a few months the marines were withdrawn.

Now we have Bosnia. Having refused to stand up to wanton aggression and
genocide, the NATO allies are now, like Lyndon Johnson and Robert McNamara,
trying to figure out what to do with an enemy who won't listen to reason and
whom they are unwilling to defeat. This fumbling about for a win in a no-win
situation is being carried on in embassies and conference rooms and cocktail
parties while "peacekeeping" troops and civilians in the combat zone are
subjected to terrible assaults and humiliations.

The United Nations troops on the ground in Bosnia (and any others who follow
them in) are doomed in the sense that they can never prevail. Troops are trained
to fight wars and should be led by commanders who want to win. Forget the
peacekeeping euphemism. You can't keep the peace with an enemy capable of
genocide. Either you fight to win, or you get out.

In Bosnia, as in Vietnam, the politicians are unwilling to concede defeat. They
are searching for a political solution, a way to save face. Meanwhile, you have
youngsters in a danger zone, doing their duty, which is to sacrifice themselves
in the service of the egos of their elders.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Dallas Townsend, 76, CBS Radio News Anchor

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 483 words


Dallas S. Townsend Jr., who wrote and anchored the morning CBS radio news
roundup for 25 years, died yesterday at Montclair Community Hospital in New
Jersey. A former resident of Montclair, he was 76 and lived in Sarasota, Fla.,
after retiring in 1985.

The cause was complications from injuries from a fall last week, a spokeswoman
for the CBS Radio Division said. Mr. Townsend had gone to New Jersey on a family
visit.

He presided at "CBS World News Roundup," which was broadcast on radio
nationally, from 1956 to 1961 and again from 1963 to 1982, with two years out to
anchor its evening counterpart, "The World Tonight."

In his 44 years with the network, he covered all the Democratic and Republican
conventions from 1948 until 1984. He reported on the Japanese peace conference
of 1951 and the start of the Vietnam peace talks in Paris in 1968.

His rich, distinctive voice informed millions of Americans about two Mercury
space flights, four Gemini missions and two Apollo launchings. In addition, he
covered atomic tests in Nevada in the early 1950's, and the inaugurations of
Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower and John F. Kennedy.

Born in Manhattan, he grew up in New Jersey. His father was an assistant
Attorney General in the Eisenhower Administration.

He graduated from Princeton University in 1940 and from the Graduate School of
Journalism at Columbia University the following year. He briefly worked as a
news editor at WQXR in New York before joining CBS in 1941.

He spent World War II in the Army, assigned to signal and communications centers
in New Guinea, the Philippines and Japan, and became a captain. He helped to set
up advance signal centers in Yokohama and Tokyo immediately after the Japanese
surrender.

Returning to CBS, he worked successively as a news editor, director of special
events and manager of television news broadcasts. In 1954, he was named a news
correspondent. From 1982 until his retirement, he anchored several hourly news
broadcasts.

He received an Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University Award in Broadcast
Journalism, a Peabody Award and an Armstrong Radio Pioneer Award for his work on
the morning roundup, the longest running radio newscast in the country.

"For 25 years, the voice of Dallas Townsend has meant intelligent, incisive
reporting and editing on CBS's enduring and distinguished 'World News Roundup,'
" the duPont-Columbia jury said in 1983. "No other newsman in our day has had a
broader acquaintance with news nor communicated it with more economy and
precision."

Mr. Townsend is survived by his wife of 52 years, Lois Bradley Townsend; three
daughters, Katherine Hamlin of Greenbelt, Md., Patricia West of Miami and Nancy
Wilson of Upper Montclair; a son, Douglas, of Baltimore; a sister, Elizabeth T.
McFadden of Bethesda, Md.; two brothers, Louis, of Washington, and Robert, of
Toms River, N.J., and 10 grandchildren.

NAME: Dallas S. Townsend Jr.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Did Protesters Really Stop the Vietnam War?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


To the Editor:

Re "When 'The System' Worked" (Op-Ed, May 30):

Carol Muske Dukes asserts that "the war in Vietnam was stopped" by the protests
and activism of the late 1960's and early 70's.

Though it's a claim that has long been favored by those who choose to look back
on the antiwar movement through rose-colored glasses, a quick check of the
record tells a far different story.

All the major public opinion polls of that era, from the first stirrings of
antiwar sentiment in 1965 to the mass demonstrations four and five years later,
showed that the majority of Americans remained more or less supportive of their
Government's policy in Southeast Asia.

The peace candidate Eugene McCarthy's near-victory in the 1968 New Hampshire
primary was fueled in great measure by voters who felt the Johnson
Administration was not being aggressive enough in its prosecution of the war.

Many of these voters went on to support the third-party candidacy of the Vietnam
hawk George Wallace in the November general election.

As late as 1972 -- a full eight years after the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, four
years after the Tet offensive, three years after revelation of the My Lai
massacre and two years after the National Guard shootings at Kent State -- the
Democratic Presidential nominee, George McGovern, running on an unambiguous vow
to stop the war, suffered a loss of cataclysmic proportions to President Richard
Nixon.

By then, of course, the antiwar movement itself had largely petered out as the
Nixon Administration implemented a series of troop withdrawals and the draft
gave way to all-volunteer armed forces.

Rather than give credit to the antiwar movement for stopping the war, I think
it's at least as valid to suggest that the turmoil created by the movement
served further to paralyze United States policy makers, whose aims in Vietnam
were never very clear.

After all, the war in Vietnam, at least in terms of Americans fighting and
dying, lasted three times as long as the Korean conflict of the 1950's -- a war
that, by way of comparison, elicited minimal backlash on the home front.

JASON MAOZ
Brooklyn, May 30, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              266 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 2, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Did Protesters Really Stop the Vietnam War?;
Not at All Alike

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 361 words


To the Editor:

Carol Muske Dukes errs in her assumption that historians believe there "are
striking ideological similarities between the magnum-carrying,
camouflage-wearing right-wingers of the 90's and the beaded, bearded, draft-card
burning protesters of 30 years ago" (Op-Ed, May 30).

The reason for the massive protest movements of the 1960's was, simply stated,
that many citizens came to realize that the nation was not living up to its own
ideals -- that reality for many was not the ideals expressed in the Declaration
of Independence or the Constitution.

Thus, minorities during Jim Crow segregation knew that all men were not created
equal. College students restricted by in loco parentis regulations realized that
they did not have freedom of speech or personal freedoms enjoyed by other
adults. Draft-age kids realized that they were not fighting for democracy or
self-determination by upholding a military dictatorship in South Vietnam.

And women not only realized that they were not "created equal," but that they
also suffered sexist slurs, the double standard, and unequal pay and
opportunity.

Thus, by the end of the 1960's, 40 percent of college students felt America was
a "sick society," and half of adults felt that "something is wrong with
America." Many of these people began working for change, from sit-ins to
demonstrations to political campaigns -- and their efforts eventually reformed
the the nation.

That is not ideologically similar to the "right-wingers of the 90's." A large
percentage of Americans today would not agree that the nation is sick, and the
November 1994 election signaled the possibility of rapid political change in
this open and dynamic democracy.

Indeed, 60's protesters have nothing to do with today's gun-toting
right-wingers. This latter group, tiny as it is, can find its origins in the
myths of the 19th-century frontier, mixed with what the sociologist James
William Gibson labels the "warrior dreams" perpetuated by film makers after what
many militiamen considered a humiliating defeat in Vietnam.

TERRY ANDERSON
Prof. of History, Texas A & M
College Station, Tex., May 30, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              267 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 3, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: IN WASHINGTON;
U.S. JET ON MISSION FOR NATO IS SHOT DOWN OVER BOSNIA; SERBS FREE SOME U.N.
TROOPS -- White House Denounces Serbs; Aides Voice Fear for Pilot's Fate

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


The White House upbraided the Bosnian Serbs today for shooting down an American
F-16 jet fighter, calling them "outcasts and international pariahs." Officials
said they feared the pilot had been killed or captured.

Only a few hours later, on a day of shifting emotions and confusing
developments, the White House press secretary, Michael D. McCurry, applauded the
reported release of more than 120 United Nations peacekeepers whom the Bosnian
Serbs had been holding as hostages. But he demanded that the rest of the
hostages, who numbered more than 200, be freed at once.

The events in Bosnia and Herzegovina clouded this evening's meeting at the White
House between President Clinton and his two top military advisers, Defense
Secretary William J. Perry and Gen. John Shalikashvili, chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, to discuss future American actions in the region. The two
Pentagon officials left afterwards for a gathering in Paris on Saturday of
ministers from countries that have contributed peacekeepers.

Mr. Clinton said little about the loss of the aircraft and nothing about the
hostages or the meeting. Appearing briefly in the Rose Garden at midday, he said
he was "very concerned" about the fate of the pilot. He made no mention of
reprisals, but in such situations retaliatory air strikes on enemy anti-aircraft
sites are usually carried out.

If hostages are still being released, one ranking Administration official said,
retaliation might have to be postponed or eliminated altogether to avoid
stalling the release or harming the hostages, most of whom are British and
French.

A senior military officer, briefing reporters tonight, said that air strikes
would be difficult in the next few hours, given what he called the "fluidity" of
the hostage situation.

Referring to his offer, announced this week, to deploy American troops to help
move peacekeepers to safer positions, the President said, "I want to reiterate
and make absolutely clear that our policy on Bosnia remains firm." Mr. McCurry
said Mr. Clinton believes the United States has "a moral obligation" to support
allies "who have troops on the ground in Bosnia who might come under peril."

Nonetheless, the downing of the F-16 greatly complicated his situation.

As he attempts to placate Capitol Hill, which has roundly condemned the new
policy, and to convince the American public that he is not being sucked into a
debacle like that in Vietnam, the President is confronted with unwelcome
evidence of how dangerous a place Bosnia can be.

If the pilot is not rescued, he would be the first American casualty or
prisoner-of-war of the intractable four-year conflict, and a rallying point for
those who oppose involvement. Dozens of French, British and other troops have
died in Bosnia since the peacekeeping mission began more than two years ago.

Mr. McCurry said that the downing of the warplane was "one more piece of
evidence that, in a wanton and irresponsible way," the Bosnian Serbs "are making
themselves outcasts and international pariahs."

Pentagon officials said that the F-16 Fighting Falcon was on a routine patrol,
of a type flown more than 20,000 times since a no-flight zone was created over
the former Yugoslavia in April 1993. The single-seat fighter was flying, the
officials said, at about 20,000 feet, in the region of a heavily defended
Serbian air base at Banja Luka when it was hit by a Russian-made SA-6 missile.

According to the Pentagon, the pilot of a second F-16 flying in formation with
the first did not see a parachute before the stricken plane exploded in clouds
below, but the pilot could conceivably have ejected out of the wingman's view.

A Bosnian Serb military source quoted by The Associated Press said a chute had
been sighted shortly before the plane crashed on the outskirts of the town of
Mrkonjic Grad. Adm. Leighton Smith, the NATO commander in the region, told the
Cable News Network that he had an unconfirmed report that the pilot had been
captured by Serbs.

Search and rescue efforts launched by helicopters from the amphibious assault
ship Kearsarge, in the Adriatic, were initially hampered by stormy weather and
clouds, then curtailed by darkness. The hunt was expected to resume at dawn.

An officer accompanying Mr. Perry said aboard his plane that it seemed unlikely
that the pilot had survived. He had probably not had time to take evasive
action, the officer said, because he had been flying just above the cloud cover
when he was hit.

Reaction in Congress to the Serbs' attack was muted.

Sen. John Warner of Virginia, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said
in Richmond that he was puzzled by the Serbs' success in downing as
sophisticated a plane as an F-16. Mr. Warner, a Republican, said "we have
adequate assets in the region to suppress enemy missiles."

Considerable confusion remained about whether the Europeans would ultimately ask
formally for American help in strengthening and repositioning the peacekeepers.

In the Balkans, it was taken for granted that such a request was coming. But
some American officials expressed doubts. One said that Britain and France had
had second thoughts about pulling out of enclaves such as Gorazde, where more
than 400 British troops are encircled and cut off by Bosnian Serbs.

Plans for such an extraction have been formulated. They would involve several
hundred American troops on the ground, with American helicopters lifting the
peacekeepers to safety and American jets flying cover. But that sort of
redeployment would constitute a retreat and might expose the enclaves to almost
immediate takeover by the Bosnian rebel forces.

Saturday's meeting in Paris is expected to reach no final decisions. A main
topic will be the rapid-reaction force sponsored by the French and British, to
which the United States will contribute equipment but no personnel. The meeting
will also serve to include the French, who have said they will not attend the
meeting of NATO foreign ministers scheduled for Thursday in Brussels.

Mr. Clinton met at the White House from about 5:40 P.M. to 7 P.M. with Mr. Perry
and General Shalikashvili to discuss contingency planning, the status of the
F-16 pilot and the hostage situation, White House aides said. The three also
discussed the Paris meeting.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton stood in the Rose Garden yesterday after
condemning the Bosnian Serbs for downing an American F-16 jet fighter. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)(pg. 5)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              268 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 3, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Let's Talk to Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


To the Editor:

The renewed tension with China and Japan over issues relating to Taiwan and
trade demonstrates the fallacy of our foreign policy toward Vietnam. Vietnam's
history of fierce independence from China and Japan, coupled with its 70
million-plus people, make it a natural ally in the region.

Contrary to those who would continue to view Vietnam as a war, not as a country,
American friendship could serve as a bulwark for peace and underscore our
resolve with Japan and China.

EUGENE MATTHEWS
THOMAS J. SCHWARZ
New York, May 30, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              269 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

BEST SELLERS: June 4, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1448 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   6   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2      2   4   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and private life.

 3      4  66   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 4          1   THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.)
                Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and
                European officials.

 5      3   6   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 6         141  OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

 7     11   3   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 8      5  50   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 9      6  147  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 10     9   2   MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport
                pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.

 11     7   9   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 12         1   THIN AIR, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $21.95.) The private
                eye Spenser investigates the kidnapping of the young wife of a
                Boston cop.

 13    10  15   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 14     8   4   BEAUTY FROM ASHES, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A
                Georgia family endures the divisive stresses of the Civil War.

 15    14   9   A DOG'S LIFE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The memoirs of Boy,
                a shaggy canine in Provence; with drawings by Edward Koren.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  34   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts
                to keep it from spreading.

 2      2   6   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 3      3  23   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 4      5  65   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 5      7   7   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 6      8  16   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 7     15   3   PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist
                tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill
                daughter.

 8      4   3   LISTEN TO MY HEART, by Kathie Lee Gifford and Cody Gifford.
                (Hyperion, $12.95.) The television personality talks to her 4
                1/2-year-old son.

 9      6   5   MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                actress reminisces about her four decades in Hollywood.

 10         1   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species
                of males called "guys."

 11    11  76   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 12     9  20   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 13    13  39   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 14        12   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive
                business strategies.

 15         9   THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL, by Anne Frank. Edited by Otto H.
                Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) The "definitive
                edition."

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  106  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 2      1  52   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 3      3  11   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 4      4   4   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer's advice.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 20, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ATHENA, by John Banville. (Knopf, $22.) In this wickedly mannerist novel, a
murderer turned "art expert" runs smack into his own past when he has to
catalogue a batch of stolen Old Masters.

DEEP RIVER, by Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr. Endo's novel follows
soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the
humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.

THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg.
(Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a
wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct
under the old regimes.

IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur --
The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World, by David Fromkin.
(Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made
the 20th century what it is.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES, by Robert Musil. Translated by Sophie Wilkins and
Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the
unfinished and unfinishable novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and
Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged
readership.

OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) An exorcist
becomes infatuated with the possessed 12-year-old daughter of an 18th-century
marquis in this magical, fatalistic novel.

ONE BY ONE FROM THE INSIDE OUT: Essays and Reviews on Race and Responsibility in
America, by Glenn C. Loury. (Free Press, $25.) An African-American economist
tackles race and poverty in a collection of biting pieces that emphasize black
self-help while also calling on the Government to aid the nation's poor.

THE ROMANTIC GENERATION, by Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A
professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of
Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849.
Mr. Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.

WALT WHITMAN'S AMERICA: A Cultural Biography, by David S. Reynolds. (Knopf,
$35.) An intensive historical excavation, aiming to show how Whitman, an
enthusiast for almost everything, transmuted into his poetry images from all
aspects of American culture.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 4, 1995, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
The nonfiction best-seller list on page 26 of The Times Book Review today omits
a book. "Spontaneous Healing," by Andrew Weil (Knopf, $23), a book by a
physician explain ing the ways in which the body heals itself, should appear as
No. 3. "Sis ters" should be No. 4, and each fur ther book should appear one
position lower.

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              270 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World: Inaction Figures;
How the World Makes Bosnia Safe for War

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1412 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


BOSNIA'S is a war nobody wants to lose and nobody wants very badly to win.
Except of course the Bosnian Serbs and the Bosnian Muslims, for whom it is a
matter of life and death.

Like most of the conflicts that have pockmarked the globe since 1945, it is a
local war that might spread; it is a civil war that looks like something else.
Lose it, people say, and your credibility (or that of the Atlantic alliance, or
the United Nations, or the civilized world) will be destroyed. Lose it, people
say, and the established order will crumble.

Much of this is pure political gas.

If it were not, if the fall of Sarajevo would really matter as much as the fall
of West Berlin would have mattered, the British and the French and the Americans
would not have spent so much time pointing bony fingers of blame at one another.
But setting aside the humanitarian concerns, the two cases are wholly different;
the loss of West Berlin would have tempted the Soviet Union, a ruthless
superpower, to try to extend its empire, but the Serbs, while capable of causing
chaos in the Balkans, are hardly such a threat to the continent as a whole.

Even last week's ominous developments -- the Bosnian Serbs' capture of hundreds
of United Nations troops as hostages (including many French and British
nationals) and their downing and possible capture of an American fighter pilot
-- seemed to serve less as a galvanic impetus to the Americans, British and
French than as a dramatic illustration of just how much they prefer to stay as
close to the sidelines as possible.

Official excuses for incompetence and official explanations of inaction aside,
the truth is that Bosnia and Herzegovina have not much of a constituency in the
world of Realpolitik. The Europeans, especially Britain and France, shrink from
seeming impotent in the regulation of affairs in their own backyard but they
also shrink from making the sort of commitment they made in the Persian Gulf,
when their oil supplies as well as their amour-propre were at stake. The
Americans have been willing to wager even less in the Balkans.

Though it is impolite to say so, the reality has been this: the Europeans have
provided the bodies for the Bosnian effort and the United States has provided
the air power and, in some cases, the logistical muscle.

Metternich, the consummate European diplomat, said that "Asia begins at the
Landstrasse," just to the east of the spires and palaces of central Vienna.
Modern western European politicians may not be quite so dismissive, but their
deepest concern is not the dreadful struggle in Bosnia but the fear that the war
will spread from the Balkans into other nations.

In each capital, the conflict is seen in different terms, which explains why it
has been so hard to agree on a common course of action.




The Americans: Few Voices of Action

George Bush and Bill Clinton differ on many things, but both, without admitting
it, have sought to avoid entanglement in Bosnia while trying at the same time
not to seem callous to the suffering there and not to let down the major allies
of the United States who have sent peacekeepers to what was once Yugoslavia.
Through all the debates about air strikes, arms embargoes and safe havens, there
have been few voices in American politics (though rather more in the ranks of
commentators) who have urged a wider American role.

So when President Clinton, who had already promised that something on the order
of 20,000 American troops would be available to help if the United Nations
forces had to be withdrawn, said last week that troops would also be available
in some circumstances to help strengthen the peacekeeping units by pulling them
back to safer positions, it not surprisingly occasioned a storm of controversy
in Washington.

Foremost among the critics was Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader
and the leader in the race for the 1996 Republican Presidential nomination, who
said the President was just reinforcing failure. Many Democrats voiced grave
doubts as well.

Mr. Dole has urged for months that the arms embargo against Bosnia be lifted, so
that the defenders of Sarajevo could compete on equal terms, even if that meant
broadening the war. His Republican colleague, Senator Richard G. Lugar of
Indiana, believes that only the insertion of a large NATO force, including tens
of thousands of Americans, could force a peaceful settlement. President Clinton,
shifting course with shifting circumstances on the ground, has tried to take a
middle position between all-out intervention and a refusal to play any role.

Behind the American reluctance to commit troops lies the memory of Vietnam, a
war in which thousands died for a cause never fully understood and which ended
in national grief and recrimination.




The British: Limit the Bloodshed

London seeks, in the best British tradition, not to produce an instant solution
in a part of the world where tribal slaughter has a long history but to limit
the conflict, winding it down if possible, preventing it from spreading if not.
To that end, the British have sent peacekeepers (and more recently, artillery
units to protect them). They have opposed rearming the Bosnian Muslims, fearing
that that would only feed the flames of war.

But they are no more interested than the United States or other NATO countries
in direct intervention of the kind that Senator Lugar contemplates.




The French: Muslim Worries

France has, as ever, its special concerns: fear of resentment and possible
unrest among the more militant Muslim immigrants in France in the event of a
Serb victory, plus determination that the United Nations, in which it plays a
major part, should have the central role rather than NATO, in whose integrated
command it has long chosen not to participate. Hence France's bid last week for
a quick-reaction force under United Nations command, an idea which in the United
States is political poison at the moment because of Republican animosity towards
the international organization.




The Germans: Bitten, and Now Shy

Germany's position is anomalous. Not only is it the closest of the big powers to
the Balkans, and the refuge of more than 400,000 Bosnians fleeing the strife at
home, it also lit the fuse, in a sense, for the strife. Tito held Yugoslavia
together; the collapse of the Soviet bloc intensified old animosities within the
federation, and Germany was the first to recognize its breakup and the
independence of Slovenia, Croatia and then Bosnia.

But "for historical reasons," as Bonn delicately puts it, Germany has sent no
troops to Bosnia. Those reasons are, of course, the ancient antagonisms between
the Germans and the Slavs, which would only be intensified by German troops
taking part in a mission to protect the Muslims of Bosnia. So Germany
substitutes transportation, medical help and logistical support for men.




The Russians: Between Two Worlds

For the Russians, the balancing act is perhaps more delicate than for anyone
else. The Bosnian Serbs are the Slavic cousins of the rulers in Moscow, and as
such, the natural repository of their sympathies. But the Russians, at this
moment in their history, have no interest in antagonizing the West. So they have
sought, with only episodic success, to act as go-betweens, trying to persuade
the Serbs in Belgrade to persuade the Serbs in Pale to knock it off, without
losing their credentials within the Slavic brotherhood.

Everyone, of course, blames the United Nations, which by its nature and the
nature of its mission in Bosnia must try to take the side of no one.

The renewed shelling of Sarajevo, the taking of hostages and the destruction of
an American plane in the last two weeks have all frayed the organization's
impartiality, to the point where its Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
suggested that the moment might have come to disband the United Nations
Protection Force and let some other grouping of nations have a try.

Every attempt so far has failed. But the effort will go on, however
circumscribed by the differing aims of outside powers and whatever the setbacks,
because southeastern Europe has become, as Assistant Secretary of State Richard
C. Holbrooke said recently, "the most explosive region on earth," and Bosnia has
reminded Europe of the power of uncontained ethnic and nationalist hatreds.

On that, at least, all the players can agree.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1878: Deal-Making. Bismarck helps Europe carve up the Balkans
and avert general war. (Culver Pictures); 1914: Assassination. The Austrian
Archduke visits Sarajevo and is shot, setting off World War I. (The New York
Times); 1955: Tito. Yugoslavia's Communist leader, having unified the land,
keeps Khrushchev at bay. (Bettmann Archive); 1984: Amity. A Winter Olympics in
Sarajevo shows the world a city at peace with its diversity. (Associated Press);
1986: Productivity. The Yugo tries to conquer the global auto market, bargain
basement class; 1994: Shrapnel. U.N. is unable to protect "safe zones." A mortar
killed this Sarajevo man's family. (Agence France-Presse); 1992: Ethnic
Cleansing. Serbs put Muslims in concentration camps, stirring international
outrage. (1992:ITN/Rex USA); 1993: Mediation. The international mediators Lord
Owen and Cyrus Vance seek a peace formula. (Reuters); 1994: Grief. As
peacekeepers struggle to keep winter lifelines open, Sarajevo's death toll
mounts. (Reuters); 1995: Armor. A truce brokered by Jimmy Carter ends; Radovan
Karadzic cheers his Bosnian Serbs. (Associated Press); 1995: Escalation. A
French peacekeeper salutes for two comrades slain fighting Bosnian Serbs.
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              271 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THING;
Holy Alienation and Anxiety, Kafka!

BYLINE: By KEN KURSON

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 49;   Column 1;   Style Desk

LENGTH: 547 words


WHAT: "Give It Up! and Other Short Stories" (NBM, $14.95), a book pairing comics
by Peter Kuper, a graphic artist, with stories by Franz Kafka, with an
introduction by the cartoonist Jules Feiffer. The book, arriving in stores this
month, is only the third work of graphic fiction published in hardback; the
"Maus" books, Art Spiegelman's account of his father's Holocaust experiences,
and "Jack the Ripper," by Rick Geary, are its predecessors. Only three of the
eight stories included in "Give It Up!" were published during Kafka's lifetime.

FROM PRAGUE TO CLEVELAND: Kafka was born in Prague in 1883 and spent most of his
working life as an insurance clerk. He died of tuberculosis in 1924, leaving
instructions that his unpublished works be burned, instructions that were
disregarded. Mr. Kuper was born in Cleveland in 1958 and has written and
illustrated many comic books, like "ComicsTrips," "World War III" and an
adaptation of Upton Sinclair's "The Jungle."

A BARREL OF LAUGHS: Though most associate Kafka with the fear and pointlessness
many of his characters face -- a data bank search of more than 200 newspapers
showed that the term "Kafkaesque" was used more than 400 times last year to
describe everything from the Vietnam War to the Torah -- biographers say Kafka
considered himself a humorist. While reading his work aloud, he sometimes
laughed so hard he could not continue. Mr. Kuper grasps this satirical edge and
takes appropriately perverted stabs: the starving protagonist of "A Hunger
Artist" is shown with one white glove with a single curl hanging over his
forehead, a not-so-subtle allusion to what Mr. Kuper calls "the prison of
renown."

AN OLD MANUSCRIPT: In conceiving "Give it Up!," Mr. Kuper said, "I was struck by
how utterly open to interpretation Kafka's stories are." This view echoes an
essential urgency that accounts for the continual re-examination of Kafka's
works in film, theater, opera and literary criticism. "The whole of Kafka's art
consists in compelling the reader to reread him," Albert Camus once said. Mr.
Kuper revisits the material with meticulous attention to its disjointed tone.
Heavy inks and old-fashioned typesetting give the stories an oppressive quality
that characterizes much European fiction between the world wars. Five stories
are unabridged, except for minor narrative devices; the others are heavily
condensed.

UNMASKING A CONFIDENCE TRICKSTER: As shown in many of the "Classics Illustrated"
series, an earlier effort to render literature as comics, the ride from book to
comic can be bumpy. Mr. Kuper navigates the transition with precision. Cinematic
techniques, like using similar forms to link disparate ideas, are used, as a
moonlit sky of "A Fratricide" dissolves into a killer's rampage. "The goal is
for the reader to read it like a book, with richer meaning perhaps emerging upon
a second look," he said. Mr. Feiffer sees the work as a merger of two distinct
but complementary world views. "Kafka's stoic Euro-alienation meets and merges
with Kuper's thoroughly American rock-and-roll alienation," he says in the
introduction. "Americans expect to be winners even as we lose. Central Europeans
expect to lose, so they shrug. In these pages, Kuper gives us the screaming
shrug."

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter Kuper has put pictures to the words of Franz Kafka in
"Give It Up! and Other Short Stories," reaching bookshelves this month.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              272 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DIARY

BYLINE: By JAMES SCHEMBARI

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words



Politics

Mr. Dole Goes to Hollywood
Bob Dole knows a big target when he sees one, so when he went after Hollywood in
a speech in Los Angeles on Wednesday it wasn't exactly a big surprise. Dan
Quayle tried the same thing a few years ago. Mr. Dole railed against the
"nightmares of depravity" coming out of California, at first sounding like he
had just about enough of the O.J. trial. He criticized the movies "Natural Born
Killers" and "True Romance," but praised such family fare as "The Lion King" and
"True Lies." You know, that's the one where the very Republican Arnold
Schwarzenegger wins back his estranged daughter by killing lots of bad guys. It
sure beats having to sit through her school play. Dole aides said he actually
hadn't seen the movie. We could tell.


Taxes

What's in a Name? A Refund
It has been said that a computer is only as smart as the person entering the
information into it. So it is sad to have to report that much of the Federal
Government is run by computer, and, more crucial, so is the part of the Internal
Revenue Service that handles tax refunds. The I.R.S. has decided to use its
processing power to match the names and Social Security numbers on tax returns
with Social Security computer files in an attempt to combat tax fraud. That is
delaying some refunds by up to eight weeks. So if your name is Jon Smith but a
Social Security clerk typed John Smith on your file, your check goes into some
sort of refund purgatory. Washington bureaucrats gave us much fewer problems
when we only let them use pencils.

Automotive

If at First You Don't Succeed...
Oh, never mind. Investor Kirk Kerkorian used fancier words on Wednesday to end
his hostile bid to take over the Chrysler Corporation, but that's what he meant.
In the month since he made his $55-a-share offer, Mr. Kerkorian lined up no
investors to supply capital and no banks to finance the debt. For a man used to
be taken very seriously, Wall Street pretty much had dismissed his offer for
lacking, how shall we say, muscle. Well, maybe Mr. Kerkorian just needs more
time to pump up his bid. He said last week that, "Withdrawing our offer will
permit us to take a fresh look at the situation and evaluate our alternatives."
That's a fancy way of saying, "We're still looking for the money."

Hot Dogs

Permit Me, Please, Say Vendors
So maybe we're all in the wrong business. The entrepreneurs who run the food
carts around New York City are seething at the city's plan to limit the permits
to run the carts. The city's rather revolutionary plan would allow one permit
per customer. Naturally, Frank Cissio, with 200 permits, is upset. So is Dan
Rossi. His 499 permits help bring him revenue of between $1 million and $2
million a year. That is not a typo. In the city of Rockefeller and Morgan, there
are people who make their millions by selling hot dogs and pretzels to New
Yorkers. No wonder David Letterman hasn't moved to Hollywood, he must be waiting
for a permit. The last time New York handed out permits people waited in line
days to get one. Now we know why.

Real Estate

King Kong Had a Better Beef
How can anyone resist a story that features both the names Trump and Helmsley,
especially if lawsuits are involved. And better, all the fuss is over the Empire
State Building, one of the few things in New York that can tower over both
personalities. Donald Trump and his partners own the building, and Harry
Helmsley and his partners lease and operate it. The Trumps sued the Helmsleys,
saying the building was infested with rodents. Helmsley sued Trump on Tuesday
for "irresponsible and unfounded actions to disparage" the building and hints
that one of Trump's partners is a Japanese gangster. Stay tuned. Now, if we
could just find a story with Trump, Helmsley and Steinbrenner.

Tobacco

Now Will You Stop Smoking?
This may be insignificant, but Philip Morris just said cigarettes can be
hazardous to your health. Not all cigarettes, just about eight billion of its
own. The company spent the past week recalling several of its brands because of
a problem with the filters. It seems they contain contaminants that can form a
chemical that is the basis for a pesticide sold as a soil fumigant. Yum. It is
unknown whether soil fumigants cause cancer in laboratory mice, but for that
macho smoker, pesticide-flavored cigarettes could have a cachet. Smokers who
used the tainted filters said they didn't really notice. Anybody surprised?

Entertainment

Mr. Ovitz, We're Still Waiting
So is he or isn't he? Everyone has been saying, "Of course he is," but Michael
Ovitz continues to deny he is leaving Creative Artists Agency to head up MCA for
its new owner, Seagram. Word is that Mr. Ovitz and several of his Creative
executives are all set to make the move, but they're still haggling ovrt just
how rich Seagram is going to make them. Seagram's annual meeting passed last
week with still no announcement, so the smart money is betting it will come when
Seagram officially takes over MCA this week. Watch this space.

Trade

Let's Meet at My Place
Can we talk? That's what the Japanese have been asking since the United States
imposed trade sanctions against Japanese luxury cars last month. But the
Americans are playing coy, telling Japan, "We'll check our calendar and get back
to you." The Japanese suggested meeting May 29 in Geneva. The United States
said, nope, we're busy, how about June 21 and 22 in Washington. The Japanese
wanted a more neutral site. On Friday, the United States agreed to Geneva, which
specializes in neutrality, but said it has to be on June 12. And it still wants
to meet later in Washington. That's called a compromise. Which is what everyone
expects to come out of the talks no matter where they are held.

The Economy

Sure Enough, It's a Slowdown
Everyone expected Friday's unemployment report for May to show that the jobless
rate had fallen to 5.7 percent. It did, but nobody was ready for the sharpest
drop in business payrolls since April, 1991. Payrolls, which had been projected
to rise about 175,000, plummeted 101,000 instead. And if that weren't bad
enough, the Federal Government heaped on more bad news by reporting that the
Index of Leading Economic Indicators fell 0.6 percent in April, the third
consecutive decline. That often signals an impending recession. So now we know
the train is coming. The question is, will the Federal Reserve ease it into the
station or will the train just crash through it?

International

Giving Peace a Chance
Thirty years ago, it was the staging area for the Vietnam War. The Subic Bay
Naval Station housed the Seventh Fleet, and the adjoining town, Olongapo,
entertained its thousands of sailors. It was a big business: about 42,000
Filipinos worked on the base. But in 1992, the United States gave up Subic, and
there was much hand wringing over what the Philippine economy would do without
the United States military. Not to worry. The mayor of Olongapo, Richard Gordon,
has turned the abandoned base into a zone for economic growth and development
and has attracted such companies as Federal Express, Enron and Coastal. About
19,000 jobs have been created. So there.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Take Off -- And These Are Just the Crew's Seats -- Two United
Airlines flight attendants try out the built-in video screens on the new Boeing
777, which is coming soon to an airport near you. On Wednesday, the jet will be
making its first commercial flight, traveling from London to Washington for
United. (Associated Press)

Graph showing the monthly unemployment rate for 1994 and 1995. (Source: Bureau
of Labor Statistics)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              273 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Return to Vietnam With Aid, Not Bullets

BYLINE: By KATE STONE LOMBARDI

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: THORNWOOD


FRANK CORCORAN'S first trip to Vietnam was in late August 1968. Then an
18-year-old marine, he was stationed in the hills west of Danang. After about a
month, his platoon was airlifted into an ambush of North Vietnamese soldiers.
Mr. Corcoran was shot in the stomach in that engagement and would have died
there had it not been for two men -- Daniel Kelly and Michael Trout -- who gave
their lives while saving his.

"I was lying there bleeding to death, and Danny straddled me to stop the
bleeding," Mr. Corcoran said. "He was killed -- blown off of me. Danny lay down
beside me, and Michael crawled on top to take over. He had just finished the
job, and as he did, Michael was blown off of me and killed."

Mr. Corcoran was unconscious when he was removed by helicopter. He recuperated
physically in a veteran's hospital in the United States, but until several years
ago he was literally unable to say the words "Vietnam" or "marine."

Frank Corcoran's second trip to Vietnam was in October 1993, a journey that
would have been unthinkable for him until recent years. He will return to the
country again later this month. On this trip, like the one before, Mr. Corcoran
will travel as a member of Project: Hearts and Minds, a nonprofit organization
that seeks to foster reconciliation between citizens of the United States and
Vietnam by providing veterans with an opportunity to return to Vietnam in a
medical-relief capacity. Members of the group escort medical aid to Vietnamese
hospitals and clinics in need, often in the same areas where they served in
combat.

Mr. Corcoran, 45, who teaches third grade in a district near Philadelphia, said
his involvement in the project is part of his long process of recovery after the
war. Most of all, he says, his participation is a way of honoring the memory of
his two late friends.

"I have learned to dedicate my life to their memory," Mr. Corcoran said. "I
realized that Danny and Michael's act of love for me had to be respected and
honored, and the better I lived my life, the more I honored what they did.

"What better way to give up the blind hatred than with medical supplies in my
arms as opposed to a weapon? It turned out to be very much a part of my healing
process."

"Healing" is a word that surfaces repeatedly with those involved in Project:
Hearts and Minds. First there is psychological healing on the part of veterans
who served in the Vietnam War, and who can now return to the country in a
different capacity.

"This war is by no means over for any of us," said Dayl Wise, who was wounded at
the age of 18 while serving on a reconnaissance team in Vietnam in 1970 and is
now disabled. Mr. Wise returned to Vietnam with the project on the same trip as
Mr. Corcoran. "Going back was a milestone in my life," Mr. Wise said. "I had to
look at what happened and see things for myself. I've kept so many things buried
in my life after the war. In a way I was able to put things in perspective."

Second, the project also provides quite literal healing -- in the delivery of
desperately needed medical supplies to clinics and hospitals housed in buildings
that are falling apart and where supplies of even the most basic medical
equipment are inadequate.

Tom Conlin, president of Project: Hearts and Minds, whose New York chapter is
based in Thornwood, described some of what he saw on his visit to Vietnam last
October. At a major teaching hospital in the city of Hue, surgeons operated
under a single light bulb. In the corner of the postoperative room, an old
hatrack stood, serving as a drying stand for surgical gloves. (The gloves were
in such short supply that they needed to be washed and reused.) In a clinic in
Phu Loc, Mr. Corcoran saw a gynecological table covered with a quarter inch of
rust, dispensary cabinets smashed and broken, beds in the recovery room with no
mattress or bedding, and the floor covered with a white powder -- a disinfectant
to prevent dysentery.

An ongoing legacy of the Vietnam War is the presence of explosives that were
dropped during the fighting but still remain buried in the countryside. During
monsoon season, when the mud rises, many of the devices come to the surface.

"There is so much out there," Mr. Conlin said. "Kids who are working in the
fields get their arms and legs blown off. We saw a young girl in Hue who was
helping her mother plow the field. She lost both feet and had shrapnel up and
down her body. More than 50 percent of the population in Vietnam was born after
1975. They didn't experience the war directly, but they are experiencing it
another way."

Not all members of Project: Hearts and Minds are veterans. Mr. Conlin, for
example, describes himself as a conscientious objector and did not serve.
Members run the gamut of the political spectrum and include those who enlisted,
those who were drafted, those who protested and those who supported the war. The
group says it is nonpartisan.

Ann Kelsey was attending the University of California at Los Angeles in 1969,
during the height of the protest movement against the war. Offended by what she
perceived as a lack of patriotism, Ms. Kelsey volunteered as a civilian to serve
in special services in Vietnam. Later, she suffered from post-war trauma and was
plagued with flashbacks. Ms. Kelsey returned to the country last fall with the
project.

"I think to a large extent returning to Vietnam gives a sense of closure," Ms.
Kelsey said. "You can stop thinking about Vietnam as a war and start thinking
about it as a country."

Those who have returned to Vietnam with the project say that they are amazed by
the attitude of the Vietnamese, who have generally been welcoming. Several
veterans described individual acts of generosity on the part of villagers --
sharing precious supplies of soda, offering invitations to dinner and presenting
gifts. Vietnam remains one of the poorest countries in the world.

"The Vietnamese people have this tremendous ability to move on," Mr. Wise said.
Still he observed remnants from the fighting incorporated into everyday life --
an overturned American helmet filled with water in a bicycle repair shop, an old
shell casing used as a flower pot.

Project: Hearts and Minds organizes two relief missions a year. The next will
depart from Newark International Airport on June 25. The project was begun in
1991 by two veterans from California. Today there are 5 chapters in 7 cities and
about 65 members. Not all members travel to Vietnam; some raise funds or work in
administrative functions. The organization hopes to expand the number of yearly
visits to 3, and some day to work in Laos, where many veterans served.

All the medical supplies are donated from medical supply companies and
hospitals, and include standard equipment like syringes, oxygen masks,
medication and surgical examination gloves. Continental Airlines donates free
transportation for all mission participants as well as the shipment of supplies
and equipment, in and out of Manila. (No United States airline flies into
Vietnam.) Participants then take a connecting flight on Philippines Airlines to
Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

Each person traveling can take 70 pounds of medical equipment. On the trip this
month, the project will visit a clinic in My Tho, the Son My/My Lai Hospital in
Danang, a clinic in Chu Lai, a children's orphanage in Hue, the Phu Tan clinic
near Tan My, the Xa Loc Hai Clinic in Phu Loc and a clinic in Ha Tan.

Those interested in the project or in donating medical supplies may call
747-2176.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tom Conlin, president of Project: Hearts and Minds, with
medical supplies destined for Vietnam. (Pg. 1) (Jim Estrin/The New York Times);
Tom Conlin with schoolchildren in Ho Chi Minh City on Project: Hearts and Minds
mission. (Pg. 12) (Frank Corcoran)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              274 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: THE NATO AIRMEN;
For These Americans, It's Just 30 Minutes to Bosnia

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN

SECTION: Section A;    Page 8;    Column 1;    Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: AVIANO AIR BASE, Italy, June 4


The war in Bosnia -- so far away for most Americans -- hit home last week at
this air base, which is Italian in name but American in every other way, from
its Burger King hamburgers to its roadside signs urging drivers to "buckle up."

United States Air Force officials, operating under NATO command, will not reveal
any details about the American pilot based here who was shot down over Bosnia
last Friday when a missile struck his F-16 fighter plane. Until his fate is
known, his name will be kept secret, together with the details of the missions
he and his fellow pilots were flying.

The pilot is the first American serviceman to be missing in action in the region
since the former Yugoslavia dissolved in 1991. And even if they cannot talk
about him, he was on everyone's mind here today, as the 8,700 members of
Aviano's American community went about their Sunday business, whether it was
attending services at the Cavalry Baptist Church in the village or continuing to
fly missions over Bosnia, 30 minutes away by air.

"It is certainly not good for anybody's morale," said Capt. James Mitchell,
spokesman for the southern command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in
Naples, which serves as headquarters for the NATO units at this and other bases
in Italy. "The extreme case of this was Vietnam, with all the missing in action.
It is a very human thing. Every hour that passes and it is not resolved does not
give us anything much to go with."

There have been other episodes in the two years since NATO has been enforcing
the United Nation's ban against flights over Bosnia's air space. In one, a
British pilot safely ejected from his Sea Harrier jet in April 1994 when it was
hit by ground fire. In another, a French Etendard jet was hit last December, but
the pilot was not hurt.

With each episode, the NATO command has tightened its control over information
about the pilots, in part for security reasons. "The nations have decided
against pilots doing interviews, especially the U.S. now that they have a
search-and-rescue mission under way," Captain Mitchell said today.

Here at Aviano, with the exception of a handful of Spanish and British airmen,
the crews are all American. They belong to the 31st Fighter Wing, a unit that
has two permanent F-16 squadrons here, with 21 planes apiece. Vice Commander
Richard L. Brenner said the 31st Fighter Wing flies between 30 and 80 sorties
over Bosnia a day, each of which lasts between three and five hours.

As the fighting in the former Yugoslavia has intensified, the NATO units have
acquired new tasks and new personnel. The unit's mission now includes monitoring
the no-flight zone, providing protection for United Nations troops on the ground
and carrying out air strikes if called in when United Nations-designated safe
areas in Bosnia are threatened. So far, NATO has carried out more than 40,000
sorties.

A year ago, 3,000 people were assigned here. Today, the number on active duty is
4,300, and many of them have brought their families.

Aviano was not built for such an influx. For the 250 to 500 people unable to
find accommodation in the nearby village, where store signs are now written in
Italian and English, there is now a tent city.

"This base used to be a sleepy hollow," said Capt. Tracy O'Grady-Walsh, a public
affairs officer who arrived here a month ago. "Now it is very typical of a
normal fighter base." Besides the Burger King, the base has its own high school,
swimming pool, golf course, movie theatre -- even a newspaper, The Vigileer,
whose 3,000 weekly copies are almost immediately sold out.

With ski slopes 20 minutes away by car, and the beaches of the Adriatic only an
hour away, Aviano's location has always made it a sought-after post for American
servicemen and women -- a "base for all seasons," as Senior Airman Dan Neely put
it.

But it is the war in the former Yugoslavia that has put it on the map in these
last two years. "On a clear day, you can see the mountains of Slovenia," said
Colonel Brenner. "And it is just 30 minutes to the center of Bosnia."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Harvard Deaths Leave a Puzzle Whose Central Piece May Never Be Found

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A;    Page 12;    Column 1;    National Desk

LENGTH: 1866 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., June 4


On the last day of final exams at Harvard University a week ago Saturday, Sinedu
Tadesse did what she had never done in a lifetime of unblemished achievement:
she missed a test and was marked absent.

It was one of several little-noticed signs that something was terribly wrong
with Ms. Tadesse, a gentle, brilliant 20-year-old junior from Ethiopia. But
because of the weekend, Harvard officials would not learn about her absence for
days.

Nor did they, or anyone else for that matter, know that Ms. Tadesse had grown
lonely and isolated at Harvard; that although she maintained a B average in her
pre-med studies, she felt pressured by the intense academic competition on
campus. To all who asked -- and several did ask -- she insisted that she was
happy and well.

No one, it seems, not even her family, fellow students or advisers in her
Dunster House dormitory, knew that she was despondent over a decision by her
roommate, Trang Phuong Ho, to move out and live with another student in the fall
-- a woman with whom, by one account, Ms. Tadesse had wanted to room herself. In
retaliation, Ms. Tadesse had stopped taking phone messages for her roommate, and
for the last two months had refused to speak to her.

But even knowing these fragments now, family members, friends and university
officials are at a loss to explain why last Sunday morning, while Ms. Ho slept,
Ms. Tadesse thrust a five-inch folding hunting knife into her 45 times, then
hanged herself from the bathroom shower stall with a rope that the police said
she used to tie her bathrobe.

"There had to be something more," some underlying problem in Ms. Tadesse's past,
to explain such a gruesome murder-suicide, said Dr. Douglas G. Jacobs, an
assistant professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School.

"You have all the possible signs of trouble," he said -- the loss of a roommate,
pressure at a top college and the cultural difficulties of immigrants away from
home. "But these are not sufficient causes."

Interviews with students and faculty members who knew the two women and with Ms.
Tadesse's father in Ethiopia indicate that the key to last weekend's events has
thus far eluded everyone.

Zelleke Tadesse, a retired school principal in Addis Ababa, said his daughter
had never indicated that she was unhappy at Harvard or angry with her roommate.
"This is a family where we all love each other, where there is no friction and
no divorce," said Mr. Tadesse, a dignified, soft-spoken man.

The coroner's report on Ms. Tadesse is not expected for several weeks, but her
father insisted that neither she nor any of his four other children abused
alcohol or drugs.

As a child, his daughter never got angry, never lost her temper, was never
depressed and always won the highest grades at the highly competitive schools
she attended on full scholarship, Mr. Tadesse said. Even when he was a political
prisoner for two years under the Marxist Government of Mengistu Haile Mariam,
Mr. Tadesse recalled, she was cheerful and visited him regularly with her
mother, a nurse.

"This is why it is very difficult to swallow that Sinedu committed murder and
suicide," he said, weeping. "Impossible."

A younger brother, Seiffe Tadesse, a sophomore at Dartmouth College, found it
difficult to accept that anything was amiss with his sister. She called him at
midnight on that final Saturday, a few hours before the murder, and he was
possibly the last person she spoke to before she died. "She seemed fine," he
told Archie C. Epps 3d, the dean of students at Harvard.

Tension and Tears In the Days Before

That Ms. Tadesse was not fine emerges only in retrospect, and only by drawing on
fragmented recollections from an array of sources.

For example, Mohammed Khan, a friend and fellow student in her physics course,
saw her in the library on the Tuesday before Saturday's physics exam. "You could
see she was stressed out," he said. "She couldn't seem to study. Her face seemed
very worried."

That same Tuesday, The Harvard Crimson, the student newspaper, received an
unidentified photograph with a letter that said: "Keep this picture. There will
soon be a very juicy story involving the person in this picture." The Cambridge
police confirmed that the photograph was of Ms. Tadesse; they are still trying
to confirm that she wrote the letter.

Then there was the note that Ms. Ho's older sister, Thao Ho, said Ms. Tadesse
sent to Trang Phuong Ho after learning that the roommate was leaving her.
"You'll always have a family to go to and I am going to have no one," it read,
apparently referring to Ms. Ho's practice of taking the bus home to Medford,
Mass., every weekend.

Although Ms. Tadesse had relatives living nearby, she was able to see her
parents in Ethiopia only once in three years at Harvard -- and only because the
university paid for the trip, her father said.

On that Saturday when Ms. Tadesse should have been taking her physics exam, she
was sitting in her room "crying the whole time," said Thao Nguyen, who was
helping Ms. Ho move out for the summer.

It was Ms. Nguyen who said that Ms. Tadesse and Ms. Ho both wanted Jennifer
Tracy of Hartford as a roommate in the fall. Officials in Dunster House said
they had no reason to believe that there had been a dispute over Ms. Tracy and
that Ms. Ho had simply asked to have her as a roommate next year. The officials
said Ms. Tadesse had also applied for a new roommate but had not asked for
anyone in particular. About a third of the students in Dunster House change
roommates in any one year, officials said, adding that they did not question the
changes unless students volunteered information.

Ms. Nguyen, a recent refugee from Vietnam, was sleeping next to Ms. Ho and
awakened, she said, at 8 A.M. to the sound of an alarm clock and the sight of
Ms. Tadesse looking "crazy" as she wordlessly stabbed her friend. Though wounded
when she tried to stop the attack, Ms. Nguyen escaped.

Ms. Ho's older sister said the roommates began bickering last fall over the
commonplace issues of neatness and noise. Todd Milne, a student at Harvard
Medical School who supervised a laboratory where Ms. Ho worked, said Ms. Ho was
"too nice" to tell Ms. Tadesse that she planned to switch roommates. "She didn't
want to upset her," Mr. Milne said.

Karel Liem, the master of Dunster House and a biology professor who served as
academic adviser to both women, and Suzi Naiburg, the senior tutor of Dunster
House, said that they knew the roommates were splitting up but that neither had
come to them with reports of rancor.

Two Quiet Students Whose Paths Met

It was chance that brought the two women together in the first place. Both were
admitted to Harvard on full scholarships. They were assigned to be roommates at
the start of their sophomore year.

Other dorm residents considered the two to be hard workers who devoted
considerable time to studying in the library.

Several students from Dunster House described Ms. Tadesse as reserved and shy.
Humphrey Wattanga, a junior from Nairobi, Kenya, who described himself as her
"good friend," said that her shyness had made it difficult for her to make close
friends at Harvard and that she was "totally isolated, always by herself."

Others saw a different picture. Nan Zheng, a junior from Missoula, Mont., said:
"She was a nice, polite and sweet girl. Whenever I saw her, she'd always be
smiling."

Ms. Ho, who was 20, was also reserved and studious, but Vietnamese students who
knew her said that with them, she was amiable and outgoing.

When Ms. Ho and Ms. Tadesse started rooming together, they certainly seemed well
matched. Both had risen from humble circumstances, Ms. Tadesse in Ethiopia and
Ms. Ho in Vietnam. Ms. Tadesse's father had been a political prisoner. At age 10
Ms. Ho had escaped from Vietnam on a fishing boat with her father and a sister.

According to interviews with friends and family members, both women dreamed of
becoming doctors so they could help others. Both hewed to the family-centered
traditions of their homelands, and both were valedictorians of their high school
classes.

At the International Community School in Addis Ababa, where Ms. Tadesse was one
of a handful of students on full scholarship, a former teacher, Telahoun Hbebe,
described her as "the pearl of the school."

She was doing well at Harvard, Professor Liem said, receiving an A in a biology
course in which she worked with prominent researchers at Beth Israel Hospital
investigating the human immunodeficiency virus in monkeys. Professor Liem said
that Ms. Tadesse, like Ms. Ho and many other students, had discovered that at
Harvard she was no longer an academic star. But she was maintaining a B average
with no difficulty, he said.

Two weeks before the murder-suicide, Professor Liem said, he met Ms. Tadesse in
his office. She said she was looking forward to the summer, doing further
research and living with nearby cousins, he recalled.

He said he had cautioned Ms. Tadesse that with a B average she would not be
admitted to Harvard Medical School. But he advised her that she would easily be
admitted to other good medical schools.

Professor Liem said that Ms. Tadesse "had not seemed distressed and was not
particularly worried about getting into medical school."

Before she left, he asked his standard question: "Is there anything that makes
you unhappy?" Without hesitation, she answered no. Then she walked out with a
big smile.

One Who Vowed To Make a Difference

By all accounts, Ms. Ho had slightly higher grades -- an A-minus to B-plus
average -- and an even more distinguished record. Among the 16,000 high school
seniors who applied to Harvard when Ms. Ho did, only two were given perfect
scores by the university's admissions committee. Ms. Ho was one them.

Only a few years after she arrived in the United States, Boston Magazine chose
her, along with Gov. William F. Weld and Bernard Cardinal Law, as one of "25 Who
Can Save Boston." She was working as a volunteer at the Spaulding Rehabilitation
Hospital in Boston, tutoring Vietnamese refugees and supporting her mother and
sisters by holding down two jobs while attending Boston Technical High School.

In her valedictory address, Ms. Ho had said: "You decide where your life is
going, whether you are going to make a difference or not. For me, I will make
many differences."

Since her freshman year at Harvard, Ms. Ho had worked in a research laboratory
at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and she had appeared as co-author of a
paper in the journal Genetics.

Professor Liem said that in one of his meetings with Ms. Ho, "she came and said
she was no longer a star, but that was O.K., because she had gotten into a very
good lab."

Ms. Ho wanted to attend Harvard Medical School and eventually become a
pediatrician. But Professor Liem said that he had given her the same advice he
gave to Ms. Tadesse: that she would probably have to set her sights instead on
one of several other good medical schools.

"She was pretty upbeat about this," he said.

Professor Liem called the deaths "a real tragedy and a real mystery." He added,
"We will probably never know what the underlying factor was."

NAME: Sinedu Tadesse

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Trang Phuong Ho giving the valedictory address at Boston
Technical High School. A biographical page from the high school yearbook of
Sinedu Tadesse. (The Boston Globe)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              276 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
M.I.A. Hunter in Hanoi Chains Himself to Gate

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;    Page 5;    Column 3;    Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 4


A former Congressman who says he knows where American servicemen are imprisoned
in Vietnam handcuffed himself to the gate of the United States office in Hanoi
that investigates the fate of those listed as missing in action from the Vietnam
War.

William Hendon, a former Republican representative from North Carolina, met with
United States officials here today but refused to say where he believes the
prisoners are being kept. He said he wants to lead investigators to the site
himself.

Saying he feared for his safety, Mr. Hendon handcuffed his wrist to the front
gate of the office compound on Saturday. Lieut. Col. Melvin Richmond, the office
commander, used bolt cutters to free Mr. Hendon and did so again after Mr.
Hendon locked himself to the gate with a second pair of handcuffs.

"I came here today to take the experts to the exact point where the Americans
are being held," Mr. Hendon said on Saturday. "Nothing political, purely
humanitarian."

The United States M.I.A. office in Hanoi has investigated more than 90
eyewitness accounts of American prisoners since 1992, but not one has been
substantiated, Colonel Richmond said.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              277 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

House Defeats Bid to Repeal 'War Powers'

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A;   Page 11;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


Despite a last-minute appeal from the Speaker, Newt Gingrich, the House defeated
an attempt tonight to repeal the 1973 War Powers Act. The act requires a
President to bring home American troops within 60 days of deployment unless
Congress authorizes their continued role overseas.

In a significant foreign policy vote, the House voted 217-201 not to repeal the
law. Mr. Gingrich and Representative Henry Hyde, Republican of Illinois, who
sponsored the repeal, said they had failed to educate enough Republicans; but
they also said the war in Bosnia had scared Republicans away from giving
President Clinton a freer hand overseas.

"A number of members felt that, on the edge of Bosnia, they didn't want a year
from now to have done something that strengthened the President's hand," Mr.
Gingrich said. "They didn't want a vote to come back to haunt us."

But others argued that the bill was defeated on its merits. "Every President
finds Congress inconvenient," said Representative Toby Roth, Republican of
Wisconsin, who voted against repeal. "But we're a democracy, not a monarchy."

Forty-four Republicans, many of them senior members, joined 172 Democrats and an
independent in voting against the measure. Favoring it were 178 Republicans and
23 Democrats.

The War Powers Act, enacted over President Nixon's veto after the United States
invaded Cambodia during the Vietnam War, requires that the President remove
United States forces from combat, or from situations in which combat may be
"imminent," within 60 days of their deployment unless Congress authorizes their
presence.

Members of both Congress and the Executive branch have long said the law is
unworkable and unconstitutional. But the Republican leaders worried that the
freshman legislators were not supporting repeal because they could not fathom
ceding power to a Democratic President whom many in Congress view as inept in
foreign affairs.

In a dramatic last-minute appeal, senior members of both parties were given a
chance to persuade members on the floor, with Mr. Gingrich exhorting them to
"allow the commander in chief to be the commander in chief."

"As chief spokesman in the House Republican Party," Mr. Gingrich declared to a
chamber packed with Republicans but short on Democrats, "I want to strengthen
the current Democratic President because he's the President of the United
States, and the President of the United States on a bipartisan basis deserves to
be strengthened in foreign affairs and strengthened in national security. He
does not deserve to be undermined."

Mr. Gingrich said after the vote that some members told him they switched their
votes and went against the repeal once Mr. Gingrich invoked Mr. Clinton's name.

Mr. Gingrich himself was perturbed that President Clinton, who like every
President since Richard M. Nixon has supported repeal, never demonstrated his
support. Former Presidents Carter, Ford and Bush had sent Mr. Hyde letters
supporting his effort.

Administration officials had indicated that Mr. Clinton had balked from any
public show of supporting repeal because he was afraid of appearing to be
war-mongering during this delicate period in Bosnia.

Mr. Clinton is also in a bind because the repeal is part of a larger foreign aid
bill that he has vowed to veto. The House is to vote on the aid bill on
Thursday, and the legislation is expected to pass. A similar bill is working its
way through the Senate.

But Mr. Clinton has declared the aid provisions "the most isolationist proposals
to come before the Congress in the last 50 years," so it would be hard for him
to advocate repeal of the War Powers Act in a bill he plans to veto.

Opponents of repeal framed the debate as one between ceding power to the
President and maintaining Congress's role as an equal branch of Government.
Representative Lee Hamilton of Indiana, the ranking Democrat on the House
International Relations Committee, implored members: "Don't cede away this
power! Work with us to improve it!" Repealing the War Powers Act, he said,
"sends a signal that we abdicate our power and give it to the President carte
blanche."

But Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Hyde in the end blamed their defeat on poor timing. "I
take responsibility," Mr. Gingrich said. They also said one problem was that Mr.
Clinton would be the immediate beneficiary.

"A lot of our members felt we would be strengthening Clinton's hand, and they
didn't want to go home and explain it," Mr. Hyde said.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              278 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Brazil Takes Big Step Toward Ending State Monopoly Over Oil

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A;   Page 21;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 583 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, June 7


Discarding a once-cherished nationalist symbol, Brazil's Chamber of Deputies
voted tonight to end the state oil monopoly, which was first adopted in 1953.

Foreign oil companies would be allowed to explore and to drill for oil in Latin
America's largest country under the proposed constitutional amendment, which
faces three more congressional votes.

With tonight's vote, Brazil's new President, Fernando Henrique Cardoso has won
victories in Brazil's lower house for each of the five free-market amendments he
proposed this year. Final approval on all the amendments is expected by
September in Brazil's Senate, a body more tightly controlled by Mr. Cardoso's
seven-party alliance.

The oil monopoly vote was easily the most sensitive of the monthlong marathon of
lower chamber votes. Today, in Brasilia, angry unionists shattered glass doors
of Brazil's Congress and stormed visitors' galleries. On the chamber floor,
leftist members of congress paraded defiantly cloaked in the green, yellow and
blue colors of Brazil's flag.

Even as public opinion and the press have been increasingly skeptical of the
monopoly, oil workers made a last stand in May with a monthlong strike that
finally collapsed last Saturday. Mr. Cardoso refused to give in to demands to
withdraw his amendment.

Brazil's President, a 63-year-old sociologist, represents a generational sea
change in attitudes that explains current public support for allowing foreign
oil companies to produce in Brazil.

In the early 1950's, Leonidas Cardoso, Mr. Cardoso's father and an Army General,
rallied Brazilians to the nationalist cause under the banner: "The Oil is Ours."

But four decades and $80 billion of investment later, Brazil's state oil
company, Petrobras, supplies half of the nation's oil needs. Of the seven
countries in the world where oil production is treated as a state monopoly,
Brazil is the only one that imports oil. With Brazil's economy expected to
expand by 6 percent this year, the state company has no hope of making Brazil
self-sufficient before the turn of the century.

"Brazil needs $4 to $7 billion every year in the oil sector, but Petrobras can
only invest $2 billion a year," said today Roberto Procopio de Lima Netto, a Rio
congressman who helped to draft the amendment. "This gap has to be covered by
foreign investment. The first goal of the project is to attract investment."

Petrobras, which drills overseas for oil in locations as diverse as Argentina
and Louisiana, has bitterly fought to keep foreign companies out of Brazil.

But with Russia, China, Vietnam and Cuba now open to exploration by foreign oil
companies, Brazil's largely leftist supporters of the monopoly found themselves
increasingly isolated. In South America, Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador,
Peru and Venezuela now allow foreign companies to produce oil.

Today in Rio, a protest rally drew only 80 of 4,200 workers of the Petrobras
national headquarters.

"The amendment is a sellout, designed to hand national resources to the
interests of imperialism," complained Jose Pericles Couto Alves, 51 years old,
who is a retired Petrobras lawyer.

But with most of Brazil's known reserves offshore and expensive to exploit,
there is not expected to be a major rush by foreign companies to invest in oil
exploration here.

"It takes the stigma off Brazil as the last holdout, but I don't think there
will be a big rush down here," said George Hawrylyshyn, editor of Brazil Energy,
a monthly oil magazine.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              279 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
From Comedy Central, An Animated Therapist

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C;   Page 18;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


Now that rerun season is lumbering along in earnest, Comedy Central is hoping to
snare viewers with several new and insistently wacky series. The theory: Better
you should laugh while perspiring this summer. Maybe.

The best of the lot is "Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist," Comedy Central's
first half-hour animated sitcom, on Sundays at 10:30 P.M. and Tuesdays at 8:30
P.M. The soundtrack's star and co-creator is Jonathan Katz, a stand-up comic,
actor and writer whose credits range from appearing on Comedy Central's
"Politically Incorrect With Bill Maher" to co-writing the screenplay for the
1987 film "House of Games" with David Mamet.

"Dr. Katz" relies on the work of stand-up comedians -- among them Dom Irerra,
Joy Behar, Wendy Liebman and Ray Romano -- whose routines on therapy are
audio-recorded and scripted into the final story lines. A computer animation
process dubbed "Squigglevision" creates undulating color figures that move
against stationary black-and-white backgrounds. Don't snicker. It works.

Dr. Katz, a bald man like Fox TV's "The Critic," is a gentle soul coping
constantly with the bizarre. His son Ben (H. Jon Benjamin), long out of his
teens, finds no work in his chosen field of daredevil, and toys with animal
husbandry at home, raising pet pigs from Vietnam. The doctor's secretary, Laura
(Laura Silverman), tells callers: "Can I call you back? I'm on the phone." She
complains, "You have no idea what it's like to deal with crazy people all day."
Well, perhaps if you worked at Comedy Central.

The patients, played by guest comedians, include Dom (Mr. Irerra) who worries
that his face looks bulbous. "Was bed-wetting a problem as a kid?" Dr. Katz
asks. "No, not as a kid," Dom replies. And then there's Ray (Mr. Romano), who is
shattered to discover that his new marriage means being restricted to "one side
of the bed for life." Dr. Katz's only relief is moping with his friend Stanley
(Will Lebow) over a drink called Zinfandel-on-the-Beach at the local bar. Each
episode ends with strains of music and Dr. Katz telling the viewer: "Oops, you
know what that means. Our time is up." Let's hope not. This inventive sitcom is
hilarious.

"Married Life," on Sundays at 7:30 P.M., comes from Canada via Ken Finkleman,
the writer, director and star. In the manner of MTV's "Real World," Frank
(Robert Cait) and Ivy (Karen Hines) have agreed to let the television producer
George Britton (Mr. Finkleman) film their wedding and first three years of
marriage. In a Faustian bargain, they are promised fame and fortune in return
for public viewing of their intimacies. There is the bridal shower, at which one
guest asks, "You don't happen to have just half a Valium?" Then there's the
wedding rehearsal, when a woman announces that she is a lesbian only to have her
husband charge, "You're trying to star in this film."

As one Comedy Central executive put it, the series tries to capture "the
absurdity of cameras filming presumably real-life events." But in ridiculing
"reality" shows like "Cops," "Married Life" is only occasionally inspired, not
least when it uses real people who turn up on location in Toronto. A man
witnessing a staged robbery expounds solemnly on Oliver Stone's film "Natural
Born Killers." One episode, promoting life itself as a reality show, is entitled
"Think Geraldo."

Further pokes at reality shows are delivered in "Drop the Dead Donkey," which
has its American premiere on Monday at 8:30 P.M. Imported from Britain, where it
appeared on Channel 4, the series is set in a fictitious all-news station,
Globelink TV, swarming with assorted misfits.

Henry (Dave Swift), the perpetually hungover anchor, storms off the set during a
dress rehearsal for a proposed talk show, shouting, "I never wanted to do this
pathetic populist pap in the first place." Also in the works at Globelink is a
reconstructions series called "Crime Time" ("Crime's here, crime's everywhere,"
say the ads).

"Dead Donkey" has won several awards, including two International Emmys, but it
doesn't travel well. Part of the reason is frequent references to public figures
who are not well known outside of Britain (the one reference to Margaret
Thatcher is unprintable here). The title, incidentally, refers to an item that
is teased throughout a newscast and finally reported at the close. Think Asa
Arrons on WNBC's "News at Six" on Channel 4 every night.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist" will be on Sundays and
Tuesdays. (Comedy Central)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              280 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

OUR TOWNS;
Off Screen, a Detective Fights Drugs in Schools

BYLINE: By Evelyn Nieves

SECTION: Section B;     Page 7;     Column 1;     Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: JERSEY CITY


CALVIN HART strode to the podium at Public School 40, his bald head shining
under the lights. Built like a missile, he looked a little scary in his
gray-green suit, fairly filling up the stage. He stroked his goatee.

"O.K., everybody stand up!" he shouted. He didn't have to do it twice.

Turns out it was a favor. "Ah, now doesn't it feel good to move?" he said.
"YESSS!" chimed 150 sixth, seventh and eighth graders, bending and stretching
like Gumbys. Detective Hart had them.

Which seemed miraculous because he was the last of six speakers to give the
students a lecture about being smart and staying in school and keeping away from
drugs. On this morning, the air hung thick and lazy over the auditorium. Another
person might have lost his words in the ether.

But Detective Hart had the students good. He said, "You kids think you know
everything, but you don't." And the audience cracked up. He widened his big eyes
behind his aviator frames and warned: "Some of you little guys want to hang out
with the big boys. They'll take you under." The boys looked at him with eyes as
round and vulnerable as unbroken egg yolks.

The man has what his associates call "a way." It's why he is the last in a group
to speak and why he is often called on to speak alone. Few students in his
hometown know that he inspired the author Richard Price's "Andre the Giant"
character in the novel "Clockers." Or that Mr. Price named the lead police
officer in his screenplay for "Kiss of Death" one "Detective Calvin Hart."

Detective Hart is becoming famous on his roaring, preacher-style talks alone. He
gave about 75 this school year, 12 over three days last week with another
officer. There are more to squeeze in before school is out.

IT'S not as if he doesn't have enough to do. He works homicide for the Jersey
City Police Department and part time as the drug enforcement officer for the
city's Housing Authority -- 64 hours a week total, not counting overtime. He
works three days from 6 A.M. until 2 P.M. for the Housing Authority, making the
rounds of all 10 projects before settling in his office at the Curries Woods
Houses. Then he works 6 P.M. to 2 A.M. five nights on the homicide squad.

Besides that, he counsels young schoolchildren, using furry puppets, on behalf
of a national program called Babes (for Beginning Alcohol and Addiction Basic
Education Studies), acts as Dad to kids in trouble all over Jersey City and
helps put together recreational programs with community organizations.

On top of that he has to drive to and from very nearly the ends of the earth,
Burlington County, where he lives with his wife, two daughters and a niece.

"Ha," he said as he laughed off the question of whether he ever sleeps. But he
must. He looks years younger than his age, almost 47. "To tell you the truth, I
used to be better," he said. "I used to open up the Y to work out at 5 o'clock.
I dropped from 270 to 250 pounds that way."

Detective Hart, who is Calvin to everyone he meets, grew up in the projects. Now
he calls Curries Woods, a hulking high-rise project by the Bayonne border, his
home away from home. He crashes in his office, a cramped first-floor apartment,
about four days a week. He keeps a bench press there, plasters the walls with
news clips and posters of Malcolm X and keeps binoculars in every room, to spy
on drug dealers.

"After all these years, they still don't learn," he said. "I had another office
first where I used to look out my window and watch them do drug deals right in
front of the window. And I'd go down and bust them."

IF he is not busting drug dealers, he is helping drug addicts. Sometimes,
they're one and the same.

It helps, he said, that he considers himself one of them. One of the stories he
tells students is his own struggle with the bottle. It started when he was 14 or
15 and lasted until he was in his early 30's. It cost him his wife, before he
went clean and they reconciled. "I'll be clean 14 years soon," he said proudly.

He has been a police officer since 1985, following in his father's footsteps. "I
had no ambition to be a cop," he said. "Even my dad left after five years and
went to the post office."

In the projects, everyone knows him. A minute walk has him waving to half a
dozen people. "Hi, Sharon, how you doin'? Hi Pat, how's it goin'? What's up,
brother?" People don't hesitate to call him, either. "At all hours," he said
with a laugh.

Sometimes, he doesn't get the calls he wants. He shaved his head in protest last
year after a 28-year0old woman, a 14-year-old girl and a 4-year-old girl were
found slain in the projects, and no one spoke up. "I grew up in the projects,"
he said, "and I know you can't sneeze without somebody knowing. And nobody saw
or knows anything about this?"

He tries cultivating trust. Everywhere he speaks, he hands out his business
card. On one side, it says "Motivational Speaker, Drug Awareness Lectures,
Certified Babes presenter." On the other: "Homicide Investigator."

"You can see me now, or you can see me later," he told the students at P.S. 40,
turning the card over and over.

It's one of the standard lines he uses to wrap his silver tongue around his
audiences. A few self-deprecating jokes about growing up poor in the projects, a
horror story or two about his experiences as a Marine in Vietnam, some ribbing
-- and he's golden.


NAME: Calvin Hart

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Detective Calvin Hart, a homicide police investigator in Jersey
City, is also an anti-drug enforcement officer for the city's Housing Authority.
(Frank C. Dougherty for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              281 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Riots by Vietnamese Erode Plan to Send Them Home

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;     Page 3;     Column 1;     Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, June 8


An international plan to end the 20-year sojourn of the Vietnamese boat people
and force the last of them back to their homeland is in danger of unraveling
after riots by the Vietnamese in detention camps across Southeast Asia.

Refugee workers say the riots show that it will be impossible to deport many of
the 40,000 Vietnamese in the camps without violence. The once-steady flow of
boat people volunteering to return to Vietnam has evaporated, at least in part
because of moves by Republicans in the United States Congress to offer thousands
of them asylum.

As a result, refugee workers say the detention camps may have to remain for
years as Asian governments, fearing more bloodshed and an outcry from human
rights organizations, give up on their plans to force the Vietnamese home.

Just today, the riot police in Hong Kong fired tear gas at a group of nearly 50
Vietnamese boat people protesting their imminent deportation to Vietnam. There
were no reports of injuries, although the kitchen and an adjacent office at the
High Island Detention Center were set on fire by the Vietnamese before the
protest could be ended.

On Monday, the riot police in Malaysia fired water cannon and tear gas to force
back more than 1,000 boat people who broke out of a camp on the outskirts of
Kuala Lumpur, the capital, to protest the Government's plans for their imminent
repatriation.

Many of the Vietnamese protesters were armed with knives, and the Malaysian
police say that after the riot, they seized daggers, swords, spears, bows and
other weapons from the camp, where more than 4,000 Vietnamese are detained.

Twenty Vietnamese were detained by the police on charges of rioting. And while
police spokesmen said no one was wounded in the clash, reporters outside the
camp saw at least two men with bleeding injuries, possibly self-inflicted. Many
of the Vietnamese here have repeatedly threatened to commit suicide rather than
go home.

"Until now the situation has been peaceful," said Erika Feller, regional
representative in Kuala Lumpur for the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. "But I think violence, at least low-level violence, is becoming a
threat."

The United States has endorsed an international agreement intended to close most
of the detention camps by the end of the year by encouraging the last Vietnamese
still left in the camps to go back home voluntarily -- and, if that fails, by
deporting them forcibly.

Virtually all of the Vietnamese left in the detention camps in Asia -- there are
large camps in Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Hong Kong and Malaysia --
have been declared economic migrants, not political refugees, and therefore have
no right to asylum under international law.

But the difficulty of carrying out the so-called Comprehensive Plan of Action
has been compounded by legislation now under debate in the United States
Congress that could result in offers of asylum to as many as 20,000 Vietnamese.

Republican sponsors of the legislation, which has been approved in the House of
Representatives but is facing a veto by President Clinton, say many of the
Vietnamese in the camps have reason to fear persecution, even imprisonment, if
they are forced to return to their homeland.

Some human rights campaigners agree. A study by the Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights, based in New York, found that "hundreds, perhaps thousands, of
Vietnamese refugees have been wrongly rejected" for asylum.

The United Nations, which employs investigators in Vietnam to monitor conditions
of the 70,000 Vietnamese who have already gone home voluntarily, insists that it
has been unable to document a single case of Government harassment of the
returning Vietnamese.

News of the recent Congressional moves has begun to circulate in the detention
camps throughout Asia, and refugee workers say it has given many of the boat
people reason to believe that their protests -- even violent protests -- could
help them achieve their dream of citizenship in the United States.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which runs the detention
camps throughout Southeast Asia, has blamed the Congressional debate for a huge
riot last month in one Hong Kong camp.

Nearly 200 people, most of them police officers, were wounded in the protest
against deportation. It was the most violent clash between the Hong Kong police
and the Vietnamese since Hong Kong's colonial government opened camps for the
boat people in the 1970's, when the Vietnamese began taking to rickety boats and
pushing off into the South China Sea in hopes of escaping their Communist
homeland.

The United Nations has also blamed the legislation for having ended the flow of
Vietnamese willing to volunteer to return home under a program in which they are
each given a payment of several hundred dollars.

The United Nations scheduled a charter flight last week for 270 Vietnamese in
Hong Kong who had volunteered to go home. But the flight had to be canceled when
all but four of the Vietnamese announced that they had changed their minds.

"They clearly told us that they wanted to await the outcome of the Congressional
debate in Washington," said Jahanshah Assadi, the chief of mission in Hong Kong
for the High Commissioner for Refugees. "I hope the damage to the repatriation
program is not irreparable, but we have very tangible evidence of people being
affected by what's going on in Washington."

Ms. Feller, the United Nations official in Kuala Lumpur, said she was certain
that the American legislation was "an important factor" in the clash here on
Monday. "The Vietnamese," she said, "have asked us point blank: Does this
legislation mean that we're going to be able to go to the United States?"

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Hong Kong police fired tear gas yesterday in an effort to
restore order at a detention center after a group of Vietnamese boat people
fearing forced return to Vietnam set fire to the administrative office. (Agence
France-Presse)

Map of Vietnam

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              282 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD NEWS BRIEFS;
Vietnam Ousts American Over the P.O.W. Issue

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;     Page 5;     Column 5;     Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 8


Vietnam today ordered William Hendon, a former Republican Congressman from North
Carolina who says Vietnam is still holding American prisoners of war, to leave
the country on Friday.

Mr. Hendon, who twice chained himself to the gate of the United States military
compound here during the last six days in order to draw attention to his claims,
said the Foreign Ministry sent him a letter telling him to leave Vietnam when
his visa, already extended until today, expired.

Mr. Hendon says Vietnam is holding P.O.W.'s in an underground jail in a military
security zone on a mountainside 50 miles from Hanoi.

Vietnam flatly denies his charge. It has said for the past 22 years that it
freed all of the 591 American prisoners it was holding in 1973, when United
States combat forces withdrew from Indochina.

The United States is trying to determine the fate of 2,204 servicemen who are
still listed as missing in Indochina. The Vietnam War ended in 1975.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              283 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: IN WASHINGTON;
After the Cigars, Clinton Still Faces Growing Criticism of Bosnia Policy

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section A;     Page 9;     Column 1;     Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


President Clinton and his national security adviser, Anthony Lake, celebrated
the rescue of a downed American fighter pilot with cigars on the Truman balcony
early this morning. But within hours, Mr. Clinton faced renewed Congressional
demands for changes in the Administration's Bosnia policy.

With Capt. Scott O'Grady pulled safely from a Bosnian forest, the House of
Representatives quickly approved an amendment to a foreign aid bill that would
require the United States to end its participation in the United Nations embargo
against arming the factions in Bosnia. Mr. Clinton has already vowed to veto the
measure because of other issues.

On the other side of the Capitol, during a tense hearing of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, Republicans and Democrats alike demanded to know why there
had been no retaliation against the Bosnian Serbs for shooting down Capt.
O'Grady's aircraft as it was patrolling a no-flight zone.

Senator John Kerry, a Democrat from Massachusetts, told reporters as he was
leaving a White House ceremony honoring newly sworn-in police officers that it
would be "appropriate" for the United States to send a message to the Bosnian
Serbs by bombing their missile sites.

He called the Clinton Administration policy "a muddle-through, wish and hope
policy that may wind up putting more pilots in jeopardy and may ultimately drag
the United States in."

The White House spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, declined to comment on whether
any military strike against the Serbs was contemplated.

But privately and on Capitol Hill, Administration officials said that they faced
many constraints when considering any air strikes.

"The only context in which we could retaliate would be in a unilateral decision,
which would not stand up very well with our allies, who are being very
supportive today of the rescue mission," said one Administration official. The
official pointed out that more than 100 United Nations peacekeepers are still
being detained or restricted by the Serbs in the wake of NATO air strikes
against Bosnian Serb ammunition dumps late last month.

State Department and Pentagon officials told lawmakers that the United States
faced restrictions on retaliation because the F-16 pilot had been flying on a
NATO surveillance mission in conjunction with United Nations efforts.

Asked by Senator Christopher Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, whether the rules of
engagement would have been different if the United States were operating on its
own, Lieut. Gen. Wesley Clark of the Joint Chiefs of Staff acknowledged that the
United States could have decided to eliminate Serbian air defenses. But he said
that the United States was "trying to follow U.N. mandates."

At another point he said, "We're not at war. It isn't Vietnam over there yet."

The standoff left members of Congress grappling with ways to help the Muslim-led
Bosnian Government, short of sending American ground forces. The House vote
indicated growing sentiment in Congress for the United States to allow the
Bosnian Government forces to rearm against the Bosnian Serbs.

"It's time to take sides with the victims of this aggression," said Senator Bob
Dole, the majority leader and the leading contender for the Republican
Presidential nomination. "It is also time for America to exercise leadership,"
he said in a speech on the Senate floor.

Administration officials today argued that ending participation in the arms
embargo would lead inexorably to a pullout of United Nations peacekeepers in
Bosnia and greater risks of United States involvement in the Balkan conflict.

"It would lead to a wider and bloodier conflict with a very uncertain outcome
for which the U.S. would have utlimate responsibility," Peter Tarnoff,
Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs, told the Senate committee.

The Clinton Administration has said it would commit up to 25,000 American troops
to help evacuate peacekeeping forces should that become necessary.

At the White House, Mr. McCurry said, "Our concerns are that lifting the arms
embargo in effect Americanizes this war."

Mr. McCurry contended that a United States decision to abandon the arms embargo
carries with it the assumption that America would equip and train the Bosnian
Muslims, and also protect the trainers. "It would be hard to see how you
wouldn't be morally compelled to take on that responsibility," he said.

The Clinton Administration has been bedeviled by the Bosnian war since it took
office, searching for a way to contain the conflict without sending American
troops.

The current crisis began last month when the Bosnian Serb shelling of Sarajevo
threatened to make the continued presence of United Nations peacekeepers there
untenable.

The shelling led the administration to advocate air strikes against Serbian
military targets as a way to intimidate the Serbs. But the air strikes
backfired, leading the Serbs to fire the single deadliest shell of the war,
killing 71 civilians, and to take more than 320 peacekeepers hostage, either by
actually capturing them or merely surrounding them.

In the aftermath of the hostage taking, the President said for the first time
last week that he would consider committing United States ground forces to the
war for the limited mission of helping reconfigure United Nations troops that
find themselves in untenable positions. On Saturday, facing Congressional
rebellion, Mr. Clinton called such a contingency "remote, indeed highly
unlikely."

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              284 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: June 11, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 56; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   7   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2      2   5   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and her private life.

 3      4   2   THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.)
                Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and
                European officials.

 4      9  148  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 5      3  67   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 6      6  142  OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

 7      5   7   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 8      7   4   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight more "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 9      8  51   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 10    10   3   MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport
                pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.

 11         1   STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A
                collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and
                short stories.

 12    11  10   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 13    13  16   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 14    14   5   BEAUTY FROM ASHES, by Eugenia Price. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A
                Georgia family endures the divisive stresses of the Civil War.

 15         1   OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf,
                $21.) The romance of a girl and a priest who is assigned to
                oversee her exorcism.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  35   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts
                to keep it from spreading.

 2      3   2   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician
                explains the ways in which the body heals itself.

 3      2   7   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 4      5  66   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 5      4  24   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 6      7  17   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) Governmental regulations.

 7      6   8   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.)
                Rituals and spiritual journeys.

 8     12  77   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories.

 9      8   4   PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist
                tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill
                daughter.

 10    11   2   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist's essays.

 11     9   4   LISTEN TO MY HEART, by Kathie Lee Gifford and Cody Gifford.
                (Hyperion, $12.95.) The television personality talks to her 4
                1/2-year-old son.

 12    10   6   MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                actress reminisces about Hollywood.

 13        10   BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) How
                computers will alter our lives in the future.

 14    14  40   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage.

 15         5   MODEL, by Michael Gross. (Morrow, $25.) The growth of modeling
                into a huge industry.

 16*        1   KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend
                of O.J. Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole
                Simpson and Ron Goldman.

 17*   15  13   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive
                business strategies.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  107  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 2      2  53   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 3      3  12   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 4          7   MARS AND VENUS IN THE BEDROOM, by John Gray. (HarperCollins,
                $22.) Maintaining passion.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 27, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that
turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which
spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents
or biological insults.

COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya, by Stephen Handelman. (Yale University,
$27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia as a lawless land at the
mercy of organized crime.

DEEP RIVER, by Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr. Endo's novel follows
soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the
humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.

THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg.
(Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a
wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct
under the old regimes.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur --
The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World, by David Fromkin.
(Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made
the 20th century what it is.

THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES, by Robert Musil. Translated by Sophie Wilkins and
Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the
unfinished and unfinishable novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and
Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged
readership.

RETHINKING AMERICA, by Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) An examination of
America's economy and prescriptions for repairing it to accord with a changed
world order, by a journalist who does not fear big subjects.

THE ROMANTIC GENERATION, by Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A
professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of
Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849.
Mr. Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.

WHISTLER AND MONTESQUIOU: The Butterfly and the Bat, by Edgar Munhall. (Frick
Collection/Flammarion/Abbeville, $45.) A profusely illustrated biographical
account of the encounter between the eccentric American painter and the foppish
French nobleman that resulted in one of Whistler's masterpieces.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              285 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Books for Vacation Reading

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 18;   Column 5;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 8323 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue
of December 1994 and suggests only high points in the main fields of reader
interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings. Biographies
and memoirs of people known for their contributions in fields other than
literature and history are listed in appropriate categories.

Art, Music & Popular Culture

THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800. By Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M.
Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite
the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color
illustrations and other useful graphics.

LES DEMOISELLES D'AVI GNON. By William Rubin, Helene Secket and Judith Cousins.
(Museum of Modern Art/ Abrams, $40.) A jargon-free study of Picasso's
masterpiece, the starting point for 20th-century art.

NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the
Bicentennial. By Robert A. M. Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman.
(Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that examines the city's development as
the world capital of finance and art, and the disputes and decisions that
directed it; with extensive local descriptions.

THE RANSOM OF RUSSIAN ART. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) The
story of a Maryland economics professor who amassed the world's largest
collection of artworks by nonconformist Soviet artists.

REVELATIONS: The Autobiography of Alvin Ailey. By Alvin Ailey with A. Peter
Bailey. (Birch Lane/Carol, $18.95.) Completed from tapes made before the
choreographer's death, this frustratingly allusive memoir suggests the sources
for Ail ey's dances.

THE ROMANTIC GENERATION. By Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A
professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of
Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849.
Mr. Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.

SEEING THE UNSEEN: Dr. Harold E. Edgerton and the Wonders of Strobe Alley.
Edited by Roger R. Bruce. (George Eastman House/MIT, $39.95.) Edgerton's amazing
work in high-speed photography; a CD-ROM comes with it.

SHAKER BUILT: The Form and Function of Shaker Architecture. By Paul Rocheleau
and June Sprigg, edited and designed by David Larkin. (David Larkin/ Monacelli
Press/Penguin, $50.) Sumptuous color photographs of Shaker buildings, taken with
care and devotion.

WHISTLER AND MONTESQUIOU: The Butterfly and the Bat. By Edgar Munhall. (Frick
Collection/Flammarion/Abbeville, $45.) A profusely illustrated biographical
account of the encounter between the eccentric American painter and the foppish
French nobleman that resulted in one of Whistler's masterpieces.


Biography, Autobiography & Memoir

ANAIS NIN: A Biography. By Deirdre Bair. (Putnam, $39.95.) An engaging account
that presents the diarist as even more self-absorbed than her work suggests.

ANNA AKHMATOVA: Poet and Prophet. By Roberta Reeder. (St. Martin's, $35.) An
ambitious effort to synthesize the facts of the life and works of one of
Russia's greatest poets.

BATTLING FOR PEACE: A Memoir. By Shimon Peres. (Random House, $25.) The Israeli
politican and leader reviews his long career, which parallels the history of the
nation.

BEATRIX: The Gardening Life of Beatrix Jones Farrand, 1872-1959. By Jane Brown.
(Viking, $50.) A lavishly illustrated account of how a niece of Edith Wharton
became a great garden designer.

CAITLIN: The Life of Caitlin Thomas. By Paul Ferris. (Pimlico/Trafalgar Square,
paper, $16.95.) A biographer of Dylan Thomas now succeeds in bringing to
tempestous life a portrait of the poet's wife.

CHARLOTTE BRONTE: A Passionate Life. By Lyndall Gordon. (Norton, $27.50.) An
engaging biography that connects the life and fiction persuasively, in
particular the relationship between Bronte and her publisher that gave rise to
"Villette," her other masterpiece.

CLOSEST COMPANION: The Unknown Story of the Intimate Friendship Between Franklin
Roosevelt and Margaret Suckley. Edited by Geoffrey C. Ward. (Houghton Mifflin,
$24.95.) Margaret Suckley's diary shows F.D.R. finding comfort in a distant
cousin who could relax, however worshipfully, in his presence.

CONFESSIONS OF A BARBARIAN: Selections From the Journals of Edward Abbey,
1951-1989. Edited by David Petersen. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A selection from
the notebooks and journals of the novelist and naturalist show his lifelong
focus on his familiar themes: anarchy, sex, defense of the natural world and how
best to die.

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL: The Definitive Edition. By Anne Frank. Edited by Otto
H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) An expanded version, restoring
entries from the original diary, gives more texture and nuance to this renowned
personal account of the Holocaust.

DR. SEUSS & MR. GEISEL: A Biography. By Judith Morgan and Neil Morgan. (Random
House, $25.) The authorized biography of the beloved children's author who gave
the world the Cat in the Hat.

DOSTOEVSKY: The Miraculous Years, 1865-1871. By Joseph Frank. (Princeton
University, $35.) Volume 4 of this planned five-part biography excels in
providing a cultural, literary, social and biographical context for
Dostoyevsky's works.

DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America. By Carolyn See. (Random House,
$23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as
it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and zany freedom in California.

EDMUND WILSON: A Biography. By Jeffrey Meyers. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin,
$35.) Lively, shapely and evocative, this book offers insights into Wilson's
public and private lives that Wilson, despite his own autobiographical writings,
lacked the introspection to achieve.

EVELYN WAUGH: A Biography. By Selina Hastings. (Houghton Mifflin, $40.) A
readable one-volume life of the English satirist who was famous as a splendid
stylist and a monstrous man.

FRANCO: A Biography. By Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge,
all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd,
lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.

GENIUS IN DISGUISE: Harold Ross of The New Yorker. By Thomas Kunkel. (Random
House, $25.) Forty-four years after Ross's death, this first full-scale
biography of the creator of The New Yorker tries to account for the formidable
editorial instincts, integrity and self-knowledge that underlay his success.

GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles. By Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton
Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly
charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central
Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.

GIVING AWAY SIMONE: A Memoir. By Jan L. Waldron. (Times Books/Random House,
$22.) An absorbing personal history of the author and her family, women who for
five generations failed or declined to keep their children.

HARDY. By Martin Seymour-Smith. (St. Martin's, $35.) An enjoyably pugnacious
biography of the English novelist and poet that does not suffer previous
biographies gladly.

HARRY AND TEDDY: The Turbulent Relationship of Press Lord Henry R. Luce and His
Favorite Reporter, Theodore H. White. By Thomas Griffith. (Random House, $24.)
An affectionate but unsentimental dual biography of the founder of Time magazine
and of one of its legendary correspondents, written by a former editor at Time.

IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery. By Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &
Schuster, $23.) The writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and
cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.

JOHN STEINBECK: A Biography. By Jay Parini. (Holt, $30.) A clearly written and
sympathetic biography of the author of "The Grapes of Wrath" that argues for a
critical re-evaluation of Steinbeck.

THE LAST GREAT FRENCHMAN: A Life of General de Gaulle. By Charles Williams.
(Wiley, $30.) The career of the much-taller-than-life soldier whose political
victories were based on a loathing for politicians and a willingness to chuck
his allies when he thought they were wrong.

THE LIFE OF GRAHAM GREENE. Volume 2: 1939-1955. By Norman Sherry. (Viking,
$34.95.) Mr. Sherry brings to the grotesquely complicated life of Greene a
relentless passion for detail, resulting in a compulsively readable account.

LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela. By Nelson Mandela.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) On the evidence of his own version of his amazing life,
the President of South Africa is no moralist or messiah but a pragmatic
politician who always chose what might work over what was ideologically
agreeable.

MOZART: A Life. By Maynard Solomon. (HarperCollins, $35.) A psychologically
informed and often brilliant analysis of Mozart (and his father) that
complicates rather than simplifies our understanding of Mozart. As it should.

MURDERERS AND OTHER FRIENDS: Another Part of Life. By John Mortimer. (Viking,
$23.95.) The creator of Horace Rumpole continues the recollections begun in
"Clinging to the Wreckage" in a tone that will be familiar to viewers of
"Mystery!"

NELSON: A Personal History. By Christopher Hibbert. (Addison-Wesley, $30.) A
biography that visits many familiar scenes but brings clarity, reliability,
convincing judgments and enthusiasm to Horatio Nelson, a unique British hero
whose personal defects could never tarnish his glory.

1920 DIARY. By Isaac Babel. (Yale University, $20.) The first English
translation of a journal kept by the great Russian short-story writer during his
service as a correspondent in the campaign against the Poles.

OUT OF EGYPT: A Memoir. By Andre Aciman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) A
splendid rendition of life over 50 years or so in the prosperous business class
in Alexandria, ending with the expulsion of the author's Jewish family.

PAULA. by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The Chilean novelist's account
of three generations of her family's history, interwoven with an account of her
daughter's yearlong coma that ended in the young woman's death.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography. By Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A
thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of
the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.

SAINT-EXUPERY: A Biography. By Stacy Schiff. (Knopf, $30.) A comprehensive
biography of the French aviator and author of "The Little Prince."

SLY AND ABLE: A Political Biography of James F. Byrnes. By David Robertson.
(Norton, $29.95.) A life of the powerful politician who at various times was a
United States Senator, Supreme Court Justice and Secretary of State.

TOM PAINE: A Political Life. By John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good
introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character, an effective
propagandist of revolution (and, on the whole, liberty) in America, France and
even England.

TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life. By Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of
the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat,
incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.

WALTER PATER: Lover of Strange Souls. By Denis Donoghue. (Knopf, $27.50.) A
critical analysis of the life and work of the high priest of Victorian es
theticism in which Mr. Donoghue argues that Pater is the fountainhead of
modernism.

WALT WHITMAN'S AMERICA: A Cultural Biography. By David S. Reynolds. (Knopf,
$35.) An intensive historical excavation, aiming to show how Whitman, an
enthusiast for almost everything, transmuted into his poetry images from all
aspects of American culture.

ZOLA: A Life. By Frederick Brown. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $37.50.) A
comprehensive biography, making use of Zola's recently published complete
correspondence, that dispels misconceptions about the writer's life and
politics.

Crime

THE BOOKMAN'S WAKE. By John Dunning. (Scribner, $21.) A luxuriantly written
mystery about a limited edition of "The Raven" whose owners have the
disconcerting habit of winding up dead.

CRANKS AND SHADOWS. By K. C. Constantine. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95.) In
this 11th novel of a series, the "generally crazy" but compassionate police
chief of a dying Pennsylvania steel town is told to shrink his already tiny
force at the same time a paramilitary group shows up.

DEAD LAGOON. By Michael Dibdin. (Pantheon, $21.) In the fifth Aurelio Zen novel,
the ministry officer returns to his native Venice to investigate the kidnapping
of an American businessman and discovers a city stagnating between economic
depression and incipient fascism.

THE EDGE OF THE CRAZIES. By Jamie Harrison. (Hyperion, $20.95.) The eccentric
inhabitants and festering animosities of a small town in Montana result in
murder in this debut novel, told in a brash, animated voice.

MURDER ON A KIBBUTZ. By Batya Gur. (HarperCollins, $20.) Inspector Michael
Ohayon faces a dual mystery when he attempts to understand the arcane ways of an
Israeli kibbutz in order to catch the murderer of its administrative secretary.

NO NIGHT IS TOO LONG. By Ruth Rendell writing as Barbara Vine. (Harmony, $23.) A
psychological thriller in which a murderer thinks he is being pursued by the
ghost of his victim.

ORIGINAL SIN. By P. D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh investigates a case
involving intrigue, malice and murder in a prestigious London publishing house.

PIGTOWN. By William J. Caunitz. (Crown, $23.) In a savvy police procedural, the
investigation of the killing of a lowly foot soldier in the Brooklyn mob leads
to the exposure of police corruption and the beginning of gangland war.

STILL WATERS. By Margaret Woodward. (Putnam, $22.95.) A sensationalistic story
is told with a delicate style in this debut novel about the murder of a rich
socialite and her daughter in Mobile, Ala.

Essays, Criticism & Letters

ANNOYING THE VICTORIANS. by James R. Kincaid. (Routledge, cloth, $49.95, paper,
$15.95.) A series of essays that take a fresh and often irreverant view of
Victorian literature.

BETWEEN FRIENDS: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy,
1949-1975. Edited by Carol Brightman. (Harcourt Brace, $34.95.) The 26-year
correspondence of two extraordinarily bright, active, articulate women who
thought a lot and gossiped no little.

THE GUTENBERG ELEGIES: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age. By Sven
Birkerts. (Faber & Faber, $22.95.) A meditation by the literary critic on the
danger of extinction for books and the bookish as the world goes CD-ROM.

JACK KEROUAC: SELECTED LETTERS, 1940-1956. Edited by Ann Charters. (Viking,
$29.95.) The first of two projected volumes of the correspondence of the Beat
chronicler.

MODERN JAPANESE DIARIES: The Japanese at Home and Abroad as Revealed Through
Their Diaries. By Donald Keane. (Holt, $50.) A collection of essays by the great
scholar of Japan that paints of picture of the country's history from the
mid-19th century to the 1920's.

THE PORTABLE JACK KEROUAC. Edited by Ann Charters. (Viking, $27.95.) An
anthology by a lifelong scholar of the Beats that shows the autobiographical
unity of Kerouac's writings.

SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and
More. By Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how
myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of
children.

Fiction

THE ADVENTURES OF MAQROLL: Four Novellas. By Alvaro Mutis. (HarperCollins, $24.)
Brilliant stuff from a Colombian writer, the second volume of interrelated,
outrageous tales from the life and times of Maqroll, a mysterious, mythic
seafarer.

THE AGE OF CONSENT. By Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) In Mr. Wolff's sixth novel
Teddy Jenks, a 13-year-old child of the children of the 1960's, is transformed
by his sister's near suicide into the historian of his family's emotional life.

ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS: The Collected Stories of William Maxwell. (Knopf, $25.)
Stories, balanced, gentle and humane, concerned above all with reconciliation,
from six decades of work by a master writer and editor who is now 86.

ANGEL ANGEL. By April Stevens. (Viking, $19.95.) A strangely persuasive novel
about a family petrified by a father's desertion, then restored to humanity by
an ebullient young woman with enough excess mental health to go around.

ANTARCTIC NAVIGATION. By Elizabeth Arthur. (Knopf, $25.) A first-person novel,
alive with feeling and animated energy, whose heroine's aim is to vindicate by
imitation the vision and morals of Scott of the Antarctic.

ATHENA. By John Banville. (Knopf, $22.) In this wickedly mannerist novel, a
murderer turned "art expert" runs smack into his own past when he has to
catalogue a batch of stolen Old Masters.

BETRAYALS. By Charles Palliser. (Ballantine, $23.) This clever novel spins out a
set of variations on the double-cross and such related themes as infidelity,
treason and revenge.

THE BLUE AFTERNOON. By William Boyd. (Knopf, $23.) A story of amoral obsessive
love in the Philippines at the turn of the century, told with the author's
characteristic vigor and inventiveness.

COLD SNAP: Stories. By Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection of
short stories that turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the biological trap called
life.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen
stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately
concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very
recently produced America's ruling class.

THE COMMODORE. By Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $22.50.) The 17th installment of the
saga of Capt. Jack Aubrey of the British Navy and his ship's doctor, Stephen
Maturin, at sea in the 19th century.

THE CUNNING MAN. By Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this wise
and entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto, is
a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well
as scientific medicine.

DEEP RIVER. By Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr. Endo's novel follows
soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the
humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.

THE DISTINGUISHED GUEST. By Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $24.) The story of an
ailing, famous mother who intrudes on the domesticity of her youngest son is
also a subtle exploration of the conflicts of public and private selves.

A DIVING ROCK ON THE HUDSON: Volume 2 of "Mercy of a Rude Stream." By Henry
Roth. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) When it rains it pours: 60 years after "Call It
Sleep," Mr. Roth, back at the keyboard, plunges on with a purposely garrulous
narration whose hero looks much like himself and whose life story centers on a
spectacular sin.

EAST, WEST: Stories. By Salman Rushdie. (Pantheon, $21.) Nine stories by the
fugitive author of "The Satanic Verses," some boisterous, some provocative, all
taking some advantage of Mr. Rushdie's difficult dual heritage.

THE FEAST OF FOOLS. By John David Morley. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) This exuberant
and inventive updating of the myth of Demeter and Persephone, set in Munich in
1987, is also a homage to the author's adopted city.

FELICIA'S JOURNEY. By William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Trevor's latest
novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering
England's industrial Midlands until she encounters an awesomely predatory
Englishman whose monstrosity is all the scarier for remaining long undefined.

FLESH AND BLOOD. By Michael Cunningham. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) An
enjoyably sprawling, old-fashioned novel explores the simmering tensions of a
suburban family whose overbearing patriarch inspires murderous passions.

FROM TIME TO TIME. By Jack Finney. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Simon Morley, hero
of Mr. Finney's idiosyncratic novel "Time and Again," returns to scramble the
pages of history by trying to prevent World War I.

H. By Elizabeth Shepard. (Viking, $17.95.) A brief, affecting first novel about
a withdrawn 12-year-old boy whose only emotional connection is with a stuffed
toy.

HOW LATE IT WAS, HOW LATE. By James Kelman. (Norton, $21.) A novel about a
Glasgow ne'er-do-well that charms, persuades and illuminates, though it is
written not only in salty talk but in the Glaswegian language.

THE INFORMATION. By Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

KONFIDENZ. By Ariel Dorfman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.) This novel in
dialogue reveals only gradually that its frightening political developments are
taking place in 1939, suggesting that fear is always appropriate.

LADDER OF YEARS. By Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) Delia Grinstead, the heroine of
Ms. Tyler's 13th novel (a fairy tale of sorts), decides at 40 that she'd rather
be somebody else -- so she simply walks out of her old life.

THE LOVE LETTER. By Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

THE LOVES OF FAUSTYNA. By Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.) At a sign
from heaven, the Polish heroine of this frolicky picaresque novel abandons her
virginity; when martial law arrives in 1981, she opens serious negotiations with
the powers of political darkness.

THE MAN WITHOUT QUALITIES. By Robert Musil. Translated by Sophie Wilkins and
Burton Pike. (Knopf, two volumes, boxed, $60.) A magnificent new version of the
unfinished and unfinishable novel by an Austrian contemporary of Proust and
Joyce whose acknowledged greatness has always exceeded his acknowledged
readership.

MASTER OF THE DAY OF JUDGMENT. By Leo Perutz. (Arcade, $19.95.) First published
in Austria in 1921, after the empire's collapse in the Great War, this elaborate
joke of a novel takes the genre itself as a stage for brilliant clowning.

THE MATISSE STORIES. By A. S. Byatt. (Random House, $17.) A trio of short
stories, each featuring the work of Henri Matisse and each containing sharp
insights into female sensibilities.

MEMOIR FROM ANTPROOF CASE. By Mark Helprin. (Harcourt Brace, $24.) The slowly
unfolding self-revelation of Oscar Progresso, the thoughtful, aged eccentric who
narrates this novel while planning a fantastical crime.

MEN IN BLACK. By Scott Spencer. (Knopf, $23.) A smart, affectionate comic novel
in which an honorable but unsuccessful novelist's life is overturned when his
pseudonymous potboiler about extraterrestrials becomes a best seller.

MOO. By Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) The novelist who is fast becoming the Balzac
of the contemporary Midwest sets her newest book on the campus of a big
agricultural university and puts a 700-pound pig right in the middle.

MOVING HOUSE: Stories. By Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace,
$18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer, which turn on the longings and workings
of memory, are rooted in the highly idiosyncratic history of Gdansk.

MY EDUCATION: A Book of Dreams. By William S. Burroughs. (Viking, $21.95.) A
barely fictionalized dream journal that offers a whirlwind valedictory tour of
the author's unconscious.

NOVEL WITHOUT A NAME. By Duong Thu Huong. (Morrow, $23.) Ten years in the army
of North Vietnam transform the protagonist of this gritty novel as he and his
nation are stripped of the ideals they have sacrificed so much for.

OBJECTS IN MIRROR ARE CLOSER THAN THEY APPEAR. By Katharine Weber. (Crown, $23.)
In an engaging, elegantly written first novel, the ghosts of a young woman's
past inhibit her efforts to help her best friend escape from a destructive love
affair.

OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS. By Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf, $21.) An exorcist
becomes infatuated with the possessed 12-year-old daughter of an 18th-century
marquis in this magical, fatalistic novel.

THE PAPERBOY. By Pete Dexter. (Random House, $23.) An eerie and beautiful novel
whose emotionally alienated title character, a reporter in quest of facts only,
is outmaneuvered by violent half-wits who know what they want.

THE POINT: Stories. By Charles D'Ambrosio. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) An
impressive collection, mixing the exotic and the familiar, precise as to prose,
various as to tone, emotionally generous.

A PRIVATE VIEW. By Anita Brookner (Random House, $23.) The aptly named George
Bland attempts to escape his placid routine with a young and surly New Age
devotee.

THE PROMISE OF REST. By Reynolds Price. (Scribner, $24.) The third and
presumably final chapter of the chronicle of the Mayfield-Kendal family, in
which contemporary woes overtake the clan.

REDEYE: A Western. By Clyde Edgerton. (Algonquin, $17.95.) An elaborate,
unbelievable plot, chock-full of believable, well-developed characters, sustains
this woolly western by an admirable Southern novelist.

RIDING THE RAP. By Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $22.95.) A dandy re-readable
thriller set in post-modern America, land of wised-up rabble and zero
authenticity; its crooks intend a whole new crime, never perpetrated before.

A RIVER TOWN. By Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $24.) It's 1899 in
Mr. Keneally's impassioned 21st novel, and Tim Shea, an outsider in an Australia
with no insiders, inexorably digs himself into deeper and deeper trouble by
always trying to do the right thing.

RULE OF THE BONE. By Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $22.) A novel that
reinvigorates the Huck Finn myth in the person of Chappie, a mall rat from
upstate New York who lights out for Jamaica with a runaway farm worker.

THE TRIAL OF ELIZABETH CREE: A Novel of the Limehouse Murders. By Peter Ackroyd.
(Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) A claustrophobic, agitated novel of London in
1880; everyone (including a clutch of famous contemporary reformers) is
connected to everyone else.

THE TUNNEL. By William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This great big novel (652 pages)
by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist,
a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is
plausible.

THE UNUSUAL LIFE OF TRISTAN SMITH. By Peter Carey. (Knopf, $24.) Its tough,
spare, considered language sustains this big and thoughtful novel, whose hero
learns that imperialism is universal, bad for weak and strong alike.

A VOID. By Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never
occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what
does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken
just to exhibit their latent existence.

WAITING FOR THE DARK, WAITING FOR THE LIGHT. By Ivan Klima. (Grove, $21.) A
fine, skeptical novel, published in Prague in 1993; its hero, a cameraman and
would-be film maker, fears that the corruption of spirit induced under the old
regime may be permanent.

THE WEDDING. By Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A fascinating, deceptively
substantial novel by an 87-year-old survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main
subject is the subtle assumptions of color, class, race and status in a summer
colony of upper-class black families.

WONDER BOYS. By Michael Chabon. (Villard, $23.) An intelligent, lyrical book
whose graceful melancholy and good humor save it from being just a novel about a
novelist making a novel.

History

ADMITTING THE HOLOCAUST: Collected Essays. By Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford
University, $23.) Mr. Langer, a retired professor of English, illuminates the
literature of the Holocaust -- the chronicles of ghetto and camp, the fiction
and poetry wrought out of the horror, the representations in film and on
television.

THE AGE OF EXTREMES: A History of the World, 1914-1991. By Eric Hobsbawm.
(Pantheon, $30.) The Marxist historian's account of the modern world as the
battleground between socialism and capitalism.

ART FROM THE ASHES: A Holocaust Anthology. Edited by Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford
University, $30.) A remarkable collection of personal accounts, both by
well-known survivors and by victims otherwise obscure, and of fiction, poetry
and art related to the cataclysm.

DEATH AND DELIVERANCE: "Euthanasia" in Germany c. 1900-1945. By Michael
Burleigh. (Cambridge University, cloth, $59.95; paper, $18.95.) An artful and
dispassionate account of the Nazi program to kill the handicapped and mentally
ill.

EXCELLENT CADAVERS: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic. By
Alexander Stille. (Pantheon, $27.50.) This fascinating and horrifying
examination, based on immense piles of documents, shows how in the last 25 years
the Mafia has terrorized Sicilian society and perverted Italian politics.

FACING FACTS: Realism in American Thought and Culture, 1850-1920. By David E.
Shi. (Oxford University, $35.) A history of the shift of the American mind from
romanticism to realism from just before the Civil War to the end of World War I.

THE FALL OF THE ASANTE EMPIRE: The Hundred-Year War for Africa's Gold Coast. By
Robert B. Edgerton. (Free Press, $23.) An accessible narrative of the bloody
struggle that resulted in the fall of the Asante to British imperialists.

THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History. By Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as
soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the
many gifted writers who saw action.

FOR THE PRESIDENT'S EYES ONLY: Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency
From Washington to Bush. By Christopher Andrew. (HarperCollins, $30.) A
thoughtful and judicious history of the use of espionage by Presidents, with an
emphasis on the last six decades.

THE FORBIDDEN BEST-SELLERS OF PRE-REVOLUTIONARY FRANCE. By Robert Darnton.
(Norton, $27.50.) A graceful and informative account of the role dissident
literature played in creating the fervor that resulted in the French Revolution.

THE GENERALS' WAR: The Inside Story of the Conflict in the Gulf. By Michael R.
Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A lucid, meticulously
researched report by the chief Pentagon correspondent of The New York Times and
a retired general who is director of national security programs at Harvard's
John F. Kennedy School of Government.

THE HOLLOW YEARS: France in the 1930s. By Eugen Weber. (Norton, $25.) The
author, a historian devoted to France, rises from immersion in the documents
bearing this scintillating, entertaining account of an unworthy but fascinating
period in French life.

IMPERIAL GERMANY, 1871-1914: Economy, Society, Culture and Politics. By V. R.
Berghahn. (Berghahn Books, cloth, $59.95; paper, $17.95.) A comprehensive
account of German society from the founding of the Kaiser's empire to its
collapse in World War I.

IN RETROSPECT: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam. By Robert S. McNamara with
Brian VanDeMark. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The former Secretary of
Defense explains, regretfully, how he and his can-do colleagues got stuck fast
in the Vietnam War.

IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur --
The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World. By David Fromkin.
(Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made
the 20th century what it is.

KILLING CUSTER: The Battle of the Little Bighorn and the Fate of the Plains
Indians. By James Welch with Paul Stekler. (Norton, $25.) A meditation on the
ways Custer and Sitting Bull have reverberated through historical memory, white
and American Indian.

LANDSCAPE AND MEMORY. By Simon Schama. (Knopf, $40.) A learned and perceptive
survey of Western attitudes toward nature in the last five centuries; Mr.
Schama's starting point is the Renaissance fascination with river, forest and
mountain as signs of a revered prototypal world.

LONDON: A Social History. By Roy Porter. (Harvard University, $29.95.) The
development of the Great Wen over 400 years, examined as a quasi-biological
explosion that everyone feared and no one could curtail.

MY FIVE CAMBRIDGE FRIENDS: Burgess, Maclean, Philby, Blunt and Cairncross by
Their K.G.B. Controller. By Yuri Modin with Jean-Charles Deniau and Aguieszka
Ziarek. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) The inside stuff from the Russian
intelligence officer who controlled the famous British moles.

OSWALD'S TALE: An American Mystery. By Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.)
Stoked by a passion to believe J.F.K.'s death was more than a meaningless
absurdity, Mr. Mailer pursues and delivers the assassin's very slightly
significant soul, using his own research and that of others.

THE PHILBY FILES: The Secret Life of Master Spy Kim Philby. By Genrikh Borovik.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) A Russian writer and television personality draws upon
his acquaintance with the aging English double agent as well as previously
unreleased K.G.B. documents to tell this century's greatest espionage story.

THE ROCKET AND THE REICH: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile
Era. By Michael J. Neufeld. (Free Press, $25.) A chronicle of the Nazis' brutal
V-2 rocket program and the German scientists who became the American space
technologists of 1945 and after.

THE SECRET WORLD OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM. Edited by Harvey Klehr, John Earl Haynes
and Fridrikh Igorevich Firsov. (Yale University, $25.) A collection of newly
released Soviet documents shows that the Communist Party in the United States
received financial support from the Kremlin and that the party established an
espionage apparatus.

SPEAK NOW AGAINST THE DAY: The Generation Before the Civil Rights Movement in
the South. By John Egerton. (Knopf, $35.) A magisterial account of the
generation of Southerners, white and black, who fought segregation from 1932 to
1954.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s. By Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with
broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when
Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.

TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change.
By Allister Sparks. (Hill & Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced,
gripping account of the long, slow and often clandestine process that led to the
end of apartheid.

TREASON IN THE BLOOD: H. St. John Philby, Kim Philby, and the Spy Case of the
Century. By Anthony Cave Brown. (Marc Jaffe/Houghton Mifflin, $29.95.) A dual
biography arguing that Kim Philby, the notorious English double agent, inherited
a propensity for duplicity from his adventuresome father.

Medicine & Psychology

AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS: Seven Paradoxical Tales. By Oliver Sacks. (Knopf,
$24.) More tales of the engrossingly abnormal by a generous, humane neurologist
who explores the peculiar thinking of both physician and patient.

BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind. By Patricia Meyer Spacks.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in
the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner
experience" as the locus of personal reality.

NIGHT: Night Life, Night Language, Sleep, and Dreams. By A. Alvarez. (Norton,
$23.) Personal and literary explorations of the less visible (and therefore more
conjectural) half of life by a gifted critic and acutely intuitive memoirist.

Poetry

THE ANNALS OF CHILE. By Paul Muldoon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Easier of
access and more emotionally direct than his previous work, these poems are also
more arcane and allusive -- especially the long autobiographical sequence
"Yarrow," an account of the birth of the poet's imagination.

THE COLLECTED POEMS OF LANGSTON HUGHES. Edited by Arnold Rampersad and David
Roessel. (Knopf, $30.) Except for juvenilia, all the poems, including hundreds
Hughes himself did not include in collections. Altogether they remind us that he
had perhaps the greatest affinity for popular speech and song of any American
poet in this century.

THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A New Verse Translation. By Robert Pinsky. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $35.) A near-symphonic rendition of the tour through hell attains a
truly Dantean velocity without missing a jot or a tittle.

A SCATTERING OF SALTS: Poems. By James Merrill. (Knopf, $20.) Merrill's last
collection, published just weeks after his death. These poems have the unfailing
style and varied brilliance one expects, but also a sense of summing up -- a
wealth of poetry reaching its final form.

SELECTED POEMS, 1965-1990. By Marilyn Hacker (Norton, $22.) Supple, and
colloquial, formalism gives an inviting elegance to poems of often astonishing
directness, heated passion and a vision of the human family that calls into
question virtually all of what are called traditional values.

Politics & Current Affairs

ALLAH O AKBAR: A Journey Through Militant Islam. By Abbas. (Phaidon/Chronicle,
$60.) A broad and gloomy photographic examination of 29 countries by an
Iranian-born photojournalist whose subjects seem rarely to take any time out
from the utmost rigors of the faith.

BROKEN COVENANT: American Foreign Policy and the Crisis Between the U.S. and
Israel. By Moshe Arens. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) A senior Israeli politician
indicts Bush Administration policy as meddlesome and duplicitous.

COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya. By Stephen Handelman. (Yale University,
$27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia, now a lawless land at the
mercy of organized crime.

THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE: How Law Is Suffocating America. By Philip K. Howard.
(Random House, $18.) A lawyer argues that this would be a better country if we
had less law.

DEFENDING PORNOGRAPHY: Free Speech, Sex and the Fight for Women's Rights. By
Nadine Strossen. (Scribner, $22.) The president of the American Civil Liberties
Union polemicizes againt the branch of the feminist movement that advocates
censorship of sexually explicit materials.

DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL. By Jean Bethke Elshtain. (Basic Books, $20.) A thoughtful
professor of ethics argues that the weakness of democratic institutions in
America reflects the replacement of rights conceived as immunities from
government interference by rights conceived as individual entitlements.

THE DE-MORALIZATION OF SOCIETY: From Victorian Virtues to Modern Values. By
Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Knopf, $24.) The distinguished historian argues that the
West has lost its moral compass over the course of the 20th century.

THE END OF REFORM: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War. By Alan Brinkley.
(Knopf, $27.50.) In the late 1930's, a distinguished historian argues, liberal
interventionism lost its nerve and settled for underwriting consumer demand,
with the results we now see around us.

GOOD COP, BAD COP: Detective Joe Trimboli's Heroic Pursuit of NYPD Officer
Michael Dowd. By Mike McAlary. (Pocket Books, $23.) Mr. McAlary, a New York
newspaper columnist who followed the case closely, reports on a police
corruption investigation that appears to have been frustrated by departmental
solidarity.

THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism. By Tina Rosenberg.
(Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a
wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct
under the old regimes.

AN INTIMATE HISTORY OF HUMANITY. By Theodore Zeldin. (HarperCollins, $25.) Not
history so much as informed rumination by an Oxford social historian who talks
to many people (mostly Frenchwomen) about the fundamentals of human experience
-- hope, despair, love, etc. -- and thinks that hope still has a chance.

KWANZAA AND ME: A Teacher's Story. By Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University,
$18.95.) A wise kindergarten teacher, long committed to integration, re-examines
its value by paying attention to what children and parents say.

LAND OF OPPORTUNITY: One Family's Quest for the American Dream in the Age of
Crack. By William M. Adler. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) Solid reportage about how a
family of poor Arkansas blacks became the kingpins of crack in Detroit.

LOSING GROUND: American Environmentalism at the Close of the 20th Century. By
Mark Dowie. (MIT, $25.) A courageous critique of the environmental movement that
contends its leadership has ceded the moral high ground to become just another
special interest in Washington.

A NATION UNDER LAWYERS: How the Crisis in the Legal Profession Is Transforming
American Society. By Mary Ann Glendon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) A Harvard
law professor sees hyperactive litigators and "romantic" judges as depriving the
nation of lawyers' real talents: solving problems and designing social
structures.

THE NEW VICTORIANS: A Young Woman's Challenge to the Old Feminist Order. By Rene
Denfeld. (Warner, $21.95.) The author, who is 28, contends that established
feminism, like its suffragist predecessor, has abandoned the quest for equal
status and turned to bashing male vices.

ONE BY ONE FROM THE INSIDE OUT: Essays and Reviews on Race and Responsibility in
America. By Glenn C. Loury. (Free Press, $25.) An African-American economist
tackles race and poverty in a collection of biting pieces that emphasize black
self-help while also calling on the Government to aid the nation's poor.

OVERCOMING LAW. By Richard A. Posner. (Harvard University, $39.95.) The author,
a high Federal judge and former law professor, examines the plight of the law
from a "law and economics" viewpoint, urging more respect for the empirical
reality of legal issues.

PRESIDENTIAL WAR POWER. By Louis Fisher. (University Press of Kansas, cloth,
$29.95; paper, $14.95.) An argument that Presidents have violated constitutional
limits on war-making power ever since the Korean War.

RETHINKING AMERICA. By Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) An examination of and
prescription for America's economy in a changed world order.

THE REVOLT OF THE ELITES AND THE BETRAYAL OF DEMOCRACY. By Christopher Lasch.
(Norton, $22.) The ills of democracy, Lasch passionately contends, arise from
such defaults as the abdication of responsibility for the community by economic
elites and the propagation by academics of a skeptical relativism.

TEMPTATIONS OF A SUPERPOWER. By Ronald Steel. (Harvard University, $18.95.) The
author, who teaches international relations at the University of Southern
California, criticizes American foreign policy as muddled and wasteful and
offers suggestions in keeping with contemporary conditions.

WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story. By Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf,
$25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of
real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.

WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story. By Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf,
$25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of
real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.

Religion & Philosophy

GOD: A Biography. By Jack Miles. (Knopf, $27.50.) Not a joke but a scholarly,
entertaining literary inquiry into the character called God as His multiple
personalities have been rendered through the ages in the Hebrew Bible.

KILLING TIME: The Autobiography of Paul Feyerabend. By Paul Feyerabend.
(University of Chicago, $22.95.) In this memoir by a philosopher who died last
year, his characteristic talent for raising hackles is clearly in evidence, as
well as the intellectual incisiveness that underlies his challenges to the
epistemology of science.

POPE JOHN PAUL II: The Biography. By Tad Szulc. (Lisa Drew/Scribner, $27.50.)
Mr. Szulc, a seasoned reporter of Polish birth, inquires into the special
circumstances of Polish Catholicism and the special stresses of fascist and
Communist domination that formed the present Pope.

Science

AFTER THE FACT: Two Countries, Four Decades, One Anthropologist. By Clifford
Geertz. (Harvard University, $22.95.) The leading anthropologist of his
generation looks back on his career and finds himself with more questions than
answers.

MARIE CURIE: A Life. By Susan Quinn. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A biography of the
great Polish scientist that conveys the warmth and genius of the two-time Nobel
laureate.

A MOMENT ON THE EARTH: The Coming Age of Environmental Optimism. By Gregg East
erbrook. (Viking, $27.95.) Essays on the most complex of modern subjects,
treating our considerable environmental accomplishments and our puzzling neglect
of threats (diseases, for instance) in other people's backyards.

MONSTERS OF THE SEA. By Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $30.) A delightful and learned
adventure in cryptozoology (the study of hidden life forms, including the
leviathan, the sea serpent, the kraken, the blob and the globster).

NANO. The Emerging Science of Nanotechnol ogy: Remaking the World -- Molecule by
Molecule. By Ed Regis. (Little, Brown, $23.95.) Crisp science journalism about a
possible world of endless bounty, produced by incredibly tiny machines.

NOAH'S CHOICE: The Future of Endangered Species. By Charles C. Mann and Mark L.
Plummer. (Knopf, $24.) The authors persuasively contend that humans will decide,
by default or by intention, who goes extinct, and at present have not a clue how
to do so wisely.

PALE BLUE DOT: A Vision of the Human Future in Space. By Carl Sagan. (Random
House, $35.) A scientist predicts that when the solar system meets its end, our
species will survive by colonizing other worlds.

REFLECTIONS OF EDEN: My Years With the Orangutans of Borneo. By Birute M. F.
Galdikas. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) An offbeat personal memoir that examines her
own life and work, by a woman who studied the most autonomous ape.

Science Fiction

BECOMING HUMAN. By Valerie J. Freireich. (Roc, paper, $4.99.) A familiar theme
-- how human are the artificially cloned "toolmen" of a moralistic but
class-conscious society? -- is given a fresh treatment is this impressive debut
novel.

THE DIAMOND AGE: Or, A Young Lady's Illustrated Primer. By Neal Stephenson.
(Spectra Bantam, $22.95). The author of the manic "Snowcrash" foresees a future
where the marvels of cyberspace and nanotechnology coexist with a revival of
Victorian social discipline.

HUMILITY GARDEN: An Unfinished Biography. By Felicity Savage. (Roc, paper,
$4.99.) Art is literally murder in this intensely imagined novel, written when
the author was a 19-year-old sophomore at Columbia University.

THE KILLING STAR. By Charles Pellegrino and George Zebrowski. (Avonova/Morrow,
$22.) A novel that coolly examines the advantages and disadvantages of
interstellar communication and concludes that intelligent species would be wise
to adopt a strategy of "shoot first, talk later."

LUNCHING WITH THE ANTICHRIST: A Family History, 1925-2015. By Michael Moorcock.
(Mark V. Ziesing, Box 76, Shingletown, Calif. 96088, $25.) This fine collection
of stories reflects the literate and humane approach to science fiction that the
author championed when he edited the British magazine New Worlds in the 1960's.

THEY FLY AT CIRON. By Samuel R. Delany. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $19.95.) This biting
parable about the bloody roots of civilization represents a felicitous
collaboration between the mature Delany and his younger self, who wrote the
first version of this tale in 1962.

Spies & Thrillers

CHINA WHITE. By Peter Maas. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) In his first thriller, the
investigative reporter explores heroin trafficking with its interconnections
between Chinese gangs, the mob and American intelligence agencies.

THE CODICIL. By Tom Topor. (Hyperion, $21.95.) When a wealthy industrialist
leaves half his estate to the child he fathered in Vietnam, a private
investigator must uncover secrets about the dead man's past in order to deliver
the legacy.

A CROOKED MAN. By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) An
attentive thriller by a daily reviewer for The Times; it debates the
decriminalization of drugs in an up-to-date Washington environment.

FREE TO TRADE. By Michael Ridpath. (HarperCollins, $23.) Murder is the starting
point in this first novel about an English bond trader who stumbles across
financial chicanery.

KOLYMSKY HEIGHTS. By Lionel Davidson. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) An American agent
braves Siberia to uncover the secret of a Soviet doomsday machine.

THE LAST HIGH GROUND. By Robin A. White. (Crown, $23.) Cultures clash but
eventually collaborate as an American investigator and a Japanese accountant
pursue a Japanese Mafioso who is sabotaging Boeing airplanes.

JAPANESE GAME. By Richard Hoyt. (Forge/ Tom Doherty, $21.) A team of American
operatives takes drastic action to alter trade relations with Japan.

OUR GAME. By John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) In a British adventure novel redolent
of John Buchan and Eric Ambler, a retired Treasury official and secret spymaster
sets off in search of a vanished friend -- a onetime double agent.

PICTURES AT 11. By Norman Spinrad. (Bantam, paper, $12.95.) A group of
ecoterrorists take a television station hostage but succumb to the temptations
of celebrity.

Sports

BREAKING THE SURFACE. By Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus. (Random House, $23.)
The Olympic swimmer's earnest memoir reveals the dark realities beneath his
public facade -- damaging addictions, suicide attempts, destructive love affairs
and infection with H.I.V.

ONE PITCH AWAY: The Players' Stories of the 1986 League Championships and World
Series. By Mike Sowell. (Macmillan, $27.95.) Recollections of the dramatic
series of baseball games that decided the pennants, then the World Series, of
1986.

STRIKEOUT: A Celebration of the Art of Pitching. By William Curran. (Crown,
$23.) An entertaining history of the evolution of the pitcher from lowly
"server" of the ball to strikeout artist.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              286 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Noteworthy Collection

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;     Page 58;     Column 1;     Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1929 words


This selection of paperbacks is from the New & Noteworthy column since the 1994
Christmas issue.
THE AGENDA: Inside the Clinton White House
By Bob Woodward. Pocket Books, $6.50.
A portrait of Presidential indecisiveness.


AS MAX SAW IT
By Louis Begley. Fawcett Columbine, $10.
A novel about a homosexual relationship seen through the eyes of an uninvolved,
ostensibly heterosexual man.
THE BALTIC REVOLUTION: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania
and the Path to Independence
By Anatol Lieven. Yale University, $15.
What's behind the former Soviets' ethnic nationalism.
THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY: The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling
By Diana Trilling. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $13.95.
Memoirs by one half of an extraordinary couple.
THE BINGO PALACE
By Louise Erdrich. Harper Perennial, $13.
Fiction about a Chippewa man and a land scheme.
THE BIRD ARTIST
By Howard Norman. Picador USA, $13.
A novel about a young man who kills his mother's lover.
THE BIRTHDAY BOYS
By Beryl Bainbridge. Carroll & Graf, $9.95.
Fiction about Capt. Robert Scott's doomed polar journey, in the voices of the
men themselves.
A BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER
By Joan Didion. Vintage International, $12.
Fiction about a woman's search for her daughter.
BRAZIL
By John Updike. Fawcett Crest, $6.99.
A novel focusing on an interracial romance.
COLORED PEOPLE: A Memoir
By Henry Louis Gates Jr. Vintage, $11.
West Virginia in the early days of desegregation.
COMPULSORY HAPPINESS
By Norman Manea. Translated by Linda Coverdale. Northwestern University, $13.95.

Four novellas about lives under totalitarianism.
CONQUEST: Montezuma, Cortes and the Fall of Old Mexico
By Hugh Thomas. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $16.
The 16th-century defeat of the Aztecs by the Spaniards.
THE CROSSING
By Cormac McCarthy. Vintage International, $13.
The second novel in the author's projected Border trilogy, in which a teen-age
boy travels with a wolf.
CROSSING THE RIVER
By Caryl Phillips. Vintage International, $11.
Four imagined journeys of the African diaspora.
DEAN ACHESON: The Cold War Years, 1953-71
By Douglas Brinkley. Yale University, $18.
A study of the elder statesman's later years.
A DIFFERENT PERSON: A Memoir
By James Merrill. HarperSanFrancisco, $14.
The American poet looks back on his youth.
A DRINKING LIFE: A Memoir
By Pete Hamill. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $11.95.
A journalist's journey toward success and sobriety.
EQUATIONS OF ETERNITY: Speculations on
Consciousness, Meaning, and the Mathematical
Rules That Orchestrate the Cosmos
By David Darling. Hyperion, $10.95.
How the action of the mind helps create the universe.
EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs
By William Trevor. Penguin, $10.95.
A master of the short story reflects on his past.
THE EYE IN THE DOOR
By Pat Barker. William Abrahams/Plume, $10.95.
This sequel to "Regeneration" continues the author's exploration of the
psychological trauma of World War I.
A FEAST OF WORDS: The Triumph of Edith Wharton
By Cynthia Griffin Wolff.
Merloyd Lawrence/Addison-Wesley, $15.
The writer's "private story," expanded and revised.
A FROLIC OF HIS OWN
By William Gaddis. Scribner Paperback, $12.
Satire on the legal system and winner of the 1994 National Book Award for
fiction.
GARBAGE
By A. R. Ammons. Norton, $9.
Views on his life and others', all in an ode to trash.
GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS. A Biography
of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb
By William Lanouette with Bela Silard.
University of Chicago, $18.95.
The physicist whose ideas gave rise to nuclear weapons.
GHOSTS
By John Banville. Vintage International, $11.
A novel about art, creativity and human deception.
HAUNTED: Tales of the Grotesque
By Joyce Carol Oates.
William Abrahams/Plume, $10.95.
Stories, including a twist on "The Turn of the Screw."
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS
By Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. Pocket Books, $5.99.
The canine mind and how it views the world.
A HISTORY OF WARFARE
By John Keegan. Vintage, $14.
The how and why of fighting through the ages.
THE HOMELESS
By Christopher Jencks. Harvard University, $10.
How conservatives and liberals have muddled the issue.
HONEY: Stories
By Elizabeth Tallent. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
Nine tales about the feelings intimacy engenders.
HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter
By Sherwin B. Nuland. Vintage, $13.
Notes on our journey's end, a best seller that also won the 1994 National Book
Award for nonfiction.
IN THE BEGINNING: The Birth of the Living Universe
By John Gribbin. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $12.95.
How this galaxy may have evolved, Darwinian-style.
IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent
By Timothy Garton Ash. Vintage, $15.
West Germany's policies toward the Eastern state.
JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart
By Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. Adams, $12.95.
The life and legend of Josephine Baker.
THE LANGUAGE INSTINCT
By Steven Pinker. Harper Perennial, $14.
How language is learned; how the brain computes it.
THE LAND WHERE THE BLUES BEGAN
By Alan Lomax. Delta, $14.95.
A 1940's musical odyssey in the Mississippi Delta.
THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night
By Bill Carter. Hyperion, $12.95.
NBC and CBS duke it out over late-show hosts.
LEADING WITH MY HEART: My Life
By Virginia Clinton Kelley with James Morgan.
Pocket Books, $6.50.
A down-home autobiography of the other Mrs. Clinton.
LEAVING HOME: A Memoir
By Art Buchwald. Fawcett Columbine, $12.
A humorist's quite unhumorous youth.
LENI RIEFENSTAHL: A Memoir
By Leni Riefenstahl. Picador USA, $16.
Self-justification by a film maker for the Nazis.
LISTENING
By Hannah Merker. Harper Perennial, $12.
A memoir about learning to live with deafness.
LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD. From Vietnam
to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War Zones
By Peter Arnett. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.
Reflections of a reporter always at the front lines.
MAKE ME WORK
By Ralph Lombreglia. Penguin, $9.95.
Nine stories about baffled and beleaguered men.
A MAN ON THE MOON: The Voyages
of the Apollo Astronauts
By Andrew Chaikin. Penguin, $15.95.
The excitement of the early years of exploring space.
MASTER OF THE GAME: Steve Ross and the Creation
of Time Warner
By Connie Bruck. Penguin, $12.95.
The man behind an unusual marriage of media moguls.
MERRY MEN
By Carolyn Chute. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $15.
A novel about a contemporary rural Robin Hood.
MESHUGAH
By Isaac Bashevis Singer. Translated by the author and Nili Wachtel. Plume,
$10.95.
Fiction about Holocaust survivors in 1950's Manhattan.
MOSES SUPPOSES
By Ellen Currie. Scribner Paperback, $10.
Short stories about love, loss and the Irish.
MY OWN COUNTRY: A Doctor's Story
By Abraham Verghese. Vintage, $13.
Reflections of an Indian physician who treated AIDS patients in Tennessee.
NEVER STOP RUNNING: Allard Lowenstein and the Struggle to Save American
Liberalism
By William H. Chafe. Basic Books, $15.
A portrait of a steadfast political crusader.
NEW YORK DAYS
By Willie Morris. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $12.95.
Also his salad days, when he edited Harper's Magazine.
ON THE REAL SIDE: Laughing, Lying, and Signifying -- The Underground Tradition
of African-American Humor
That Transformed American Culture, From Slavery
to Richard Pryor
By Mel Watkins. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $15.
The development of a self-deprecating comic spirit.
PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA
By Roddy Doyle. Penguin, $10.95.
Fiction about a 10-year-old boy in 1960's Dublin.
THE PALACE THIEF
By Ethan Canin. Picador USA, $10.
Four long stories about men and their failings.
PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White
By Brent Staples. Avon, $11.
A memoir about two sons of a black family and the different roads they took.
A PERSONAL MATTER
By Kenzaburo Oe. Translated by John Nathan.
Grove, $7.95.
A Nobel laureate's autobiographical novel about the father of a severely
handicapped child.
PICASSO AND DORA: A Personal Memoir
By James Lord. Fromm, $16.95.
Reminiscences of relationships between the author, Picasso and the painter's
onetime mistress, Dora Maar.
THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS
By Ellis Cose. Harper Perennial, $12.
The subtle discrimination against black professionals.
THE RAPE OF EUROPA: The Fate of Europe's Treasures in the Third Reich and the
Second World War
By Lynn H. Nicholas. Vintage, $15.
How Hitler's forces plundered artworks.
A REBEL IN DEFENSE OF TRADITION: The Life and Politics of Dwight Macdonald
By Michael Wreszin. Basic Books, $15.
A left-leaning journalist who was his own man.
THE ROBBER BRIDE
By Margaret Atwood. Bantam, $6.50.
A novel about a predatory woman and her victims.
THE ROAD TO SAN GIOVANNI
By Italo Calvino. Translated by Tim Parks.
Vintage International, $10.
Five essays on his life and development as a writer.
THE RUSSIAN GIRL
By Kingsley Amis. Penguin, $10.95.
A comic novel about a London scholar's unwise affair.
SECOND NATURE
By Alice Hoffman. Berkley, $6.50.
Fiction about the manhood of a child raised by wolves.
THE SILENT CRY
By Kenzaburo Oe. Translated by John Bester.
Kodansha International, $11.
A tale of two Japanese brothers in crisis.
THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath & Ted Hughes
By Janet Malcolm. Vintage, $12.
A new look at the volatile marriage of two poets.
SOULS RAISED FROM THE DEAD
By Doris Betts. Scribner Paperback, $12.
Fiction revolving around a dying 13-year-old girl.
THE STONE DIARIES
By Carol Shields. Penguin, $10.95.
The 20th century, revealed through the domestic details of one woman's life.
STONES FROM THE RIVER
By Ursula Hegi. Scribner Paperback, $12.
A novel about the Nazi era, in which a dwarf becomes the moral conscience of her
German town.
THANK YOU FOR SMOKING
By Christopher Buckley. Harper Perennial, $12.
Fiction whose antihero is a tobacco lobbyist.
TRAIN GO SORRY: Inside a Deaf World
By Leah Hager Cohen. Vintage, $13.
Memoirs of a hearing woman raised among the deaf.
TWO NATIONS: Black and White, Separate,
Hostile, Unequal
By Andrew Hacker. Ballantine, $12.
An expanded and updated edition of a work that shows how the legacy of slavery
still polarizes the races.
THE UNREDEEMED CAPTIVE: A Family Story
From Early America
By John Demos. Vintage, $13.
The tale of a kidnapped colonial child who chose to stay with her Indian
captors.
THE UNQUIET GHOST: Russians Remember Stalin
By Adam Hochschild. Penguin, $12.95.
Interviews with perpetrators and victims of despotism.
THE WAGES OF GUILT: Memories of War in Germany
and Japan
By Ian Buruma. Plume, $12.95.
An argument that national politics, not national character, was responsible for
war crimes.
W. E. B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919
By David Levering Lewis.
John Macrae/Owl/Holt, $17.95.
The Pulitzer Prize-winning study of a tireless champion of black civil rights.
WHAT IS TOLD
By Askold Melnyczuk. Faber & Faber, $11.95.
Fiction about generations of Ukrainian-Americans.
WHITE MAN'S GRAVE
By Richard Dooling. Picador USA, $13.
A comic novel about Africa and colonialism.
WILL ROGERS: A Biography
By Ben Yagoda. HarperCollins West, $14.
A profile of an American comic master.
WITHOUT A HERO: Stories
By T. Coraghessan Boyle. Penguin, $10.95.
Tales satirizing the fringes of contemporary culture.
WRINKLES IN TIME
By George Smoot and Keay Davidson. Avon, $12.50.
Why the universe displays certain irregularities.
   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              287 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Bad News They Can Manage

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: PARIS


EVER since the traumatic televised spectacle of a dead American helicopter
crewman being dragged through the streets of Mogadishu, the "Somalia syndrome"
has been a prime worry of governments mired or trying to stay unmired in Bosnia.
Lately the United States, France and Britain have taken different approaches to
managing the risks posed by troubling media coverage of soldiers doing what
soldiers are paid to do -- stand in harm's way.

Consider how the United States dealt with the shooting down of Air Force Capt.
Scott F. O'Grady before his dramatic rescue last week, and how Britain and
France have coped with the embarrassment of the Bosnian Serbs taking many of
their soldiers hostage this month (more than half of the nearly 400 have since
been freed).

After Captain O'Grady's F-16 was shot down over Bosnia on June 2, the NATO
military command in Naples, Italy, did not release his name -- following
standard American military practice since the Vietnam War, when the rule was
that soldiers killed or missing in action were not named until after next of kin
had been notified.

Capt. Jim Mitchell of the United States Navy, the NATO spokesman in Naples, said
several American news organizations had learned Captain O'Grady's identity early
last week but agreed not to broadcast his name until his rescue on Thursday. The
military's rationale for withholding his name was that if he had been captured,
the Bosnian Serbs might have used it and his family background against him to
break his morale or worm information out of him.




Obscured Faces

France, with far more troops at peril, exacted greater restraints on coverage.
Both President Jacques Chirac and his uniformed hierarchy were embarrassed by
the humiliating spectacle of more than 100 lightly armed French soldiers in the
United Nations Protection Force being taken hostage and then displayed on
Bosnian Serb television handcuffed to fences and poles to deter NATO planes from
further bombing. When French television and other media picked up the pitiful
images, Adm. Jacques Lanxade, the chief of the French general staff, sent out
strong requests to blur their faces at least so that individual soldiers could
not be identified from them.

"We wanted to protect them and their families from an invasion of privacy," a
French military spokesman said -- to say nothing of the possibility that too
many discouraging images on TV might increase public pressure on Mr. Chirac to
pull out the thousands of French soldiers in Bosnia.

Most French news organizations, traditionally docile in the face of authority,
complied. L'Express, a weekly magazine, defied it with a cover photo of two
French soldiers with their hands up in surrender, and could face opprobrium or
lawsuits from soldiers' families. But no action has been threatened against
British and other foreign television organizations that saw no reason to heed
the ban and beamed images into France.

Britain has a more unruly press and also a long tradition of "D-notices,"
military requests with the force of commands not to publicize information deemed
harmful. But though the Defense Ministry did not disclose the names of the 33
British soldiers taken hostage, it also made no move to prevent British news
media from identifying them or interviewing their relatives at home. "It is not
our role to interfere with the editorial judgment of the media," a spokesman
said. "What we want is for the hostages not to be placed in danger, and as long
as that is not the case, we are satisfied."

Britain, like the United States, also has an all-professional military, one with
a traditionally stiff-upper-lip attitude.

Unlike Americans these days, British leaders seem neither afraid to send them
into danger nor particularly shocked at what sometimes happens when they go. But
the Somalia syndrome has not been licked yet in Bosnia, and the ultimate mission
of the reinforcements the Europeans are sending soon could yet be, as in
Somalia, a sheepish withdrawal of peacekeepers.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: French media agreed to obscure hostages' faces. This headline
said, "Blue Helmets -- 'Nothing will ever be the same . . .' '

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              288 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Bureaucracy: What's Left To Shrink?

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 660 words


Republicans have been complaining loudly that government is America's No. 1
growth industry, bigger than cars, computers or even health care. The only way
to curb this rampant monster? Shift more and more responsibility from Washington
to state capitals and city halls.

You'd never guess from all that complaining that the Federal bureaucracy, far
from burgeoning, has been shrinking. Nor would you guess that all the growth in
government has occurred at the state and local level.

It's true though.

The Government's own employment data, reported every month since 1939 by the
Department of Labor, show that Federal jobs, not counting the military, are a
smaller share of all jobs now than at any time since the eve of World War II.
The ratio of Federal bureaucrats to American citizens is lower -- a lot lower --
than it was when Dwight Eisenhower was in the White House. Since the end of the
1980's, while the economy has added 8 million jobs, the number of civil servants
has dropped, to 2.8 million from 3 million.

Granted, nobody would argue that a smaller Federal payroll means that the
Federal Government is less powerful than it used to be. It is spending as much
money as it ever did. Equally important, Washington makes the rules. Robert
Higgs, an economist and author of "Crisis and Leviathan," the conservative
classic about the natural tendency of government to grow over time, points out
that government employment "only counts the people who work for the government,
not all the people who are only doing what they're doing because of the
government."

Nonetheless, the image of a Government vastly more bloated than it was in the
golden 1950's and 60's is clearly misleading.

The shrinkage of the Federal bureaucracy isn't tied to one political party,
either. It started not when Ronald Reagan moved into the White House, but when
Newt Gingrich and Bill Clinton were in still in college, in the mid-60's, not
long after Lyndon B. Johnson coined the term "Great Society."

And the bureaucracy's failure to grow in lockstep with the economy can't be
traced to any single group of workers. The number of civilian defense workers,
who account for a bit more than a quarter of Federal employees, dwindled after
Vietnam and the end of the cold war. But so did the number of postal workers,
who make up almost as large a share of the total. And so did the other
categories, include everyone from Department of Agriculture meat inspectors to
national park rangers to National Institutes of Health physicians.

What growth there has been in government employment, it turns out, has been at
the state and local level, exactly where the Republican reformers think
government should be most active. But this shift is no product of the recent
anti-Washington mood. The biggest expansion of payrolls took place in the
1950's, 1960's and early 1970's, when the 75 million-strong baby boom generation
flooded into schools and suburbanization placed heavy demands for roads and
other public works. And while some of the growth in state and especially local
government jobs undoubtedly reflects mandates like Medicare that are imposed by
Washington, most of it has been driven by education. Half of the 17 million
state and local workers work in the schools.

Indeed, as states and local governments have taken on larger roles, the Federal
Government's function has changed as well. As entitlement programs have grown,
much of what Washington does involves gathering taxes and transferring money to
people who get Government checks, whether it's farmers who get crop payments,
mothers who collect welfare, students who receive subsidized loans or people who
get Medicare reimbursements.

"The Federal Government has gone from being a service provider to being a
provider of cash," said Stephen Moore, an economist at the Cato Institute, a
libertarian research organization in Washington, "and that doesn't take a lot of
people."

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: State and local employees as a percentage of all workers.
Federal employees as a percentage of all workers. Members of the armed forces
are not included. The figures for 1995 are for the first five months of the
year. (Source: Department of Labor)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              289 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Movie Violence Has Become Routine

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 14;   Column 3;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 210 words


To the Editor:

In your June 4 news article on the general moviegoer's response to Senator Bob
Dole's comments on the entertainment industry, I might submit that the
17-year-old high school junior who admits to seeing "Natural Born Killers" seven
times graphically illustrates the magnitude of the cultural problem that Senator
Dole and others decry.

For anyone at that impressionable age to repeatedly witness and "really like"
such a wanton depiction of mindless, casual violence cannot but adversely affect
the outlook of such a person, and, by extension, of society as a whole.

I am a surgeon of 30 years' experience, including a year's service in Vietnam in
1968-69 and, no, I have not seen this movie.

The reviews were enough to send me elsewhere.

This brings to mind the totally stunned silence with which the movie audience in
Houston greeted the premiere of Alfred Hitchcock's "Psycho" in the Majestic
Theater, with every one of the 2,000 seats filled. Not one sound was heard as
everyone sat there in stunned silence, because of the wanton violence in the
shower scene.

Nowadays such violence is considered routine, and audiences are inured to
violence 10 times as horrific.

BOONE BRACKETT
Oak Park, Ill., June 5, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              290 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
How a Bit of Jamming Grew Into a Jubilee

BYLINE: PETER WATROUS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words


GEORGE WEIN'S JVC JAZZ FESTIVAL which opens on June 23 in New York, is the
granddaddy of them all. Not only is it the oldest festival of its kind, but in
its breadth it is the model for hundreds of others worldwide. Since its
inception 41 years ago, it has reflected both Mr. Wein's tastes and a sense of
marketplace. Here are some major stops along the path the festival has traveled.

   PETER WATROUS

THE 1950'S

1954: Some 5,000 seats are nailed down on center court at the Newport Casino, in
Newport, R.I., the same court on which the tennis legend Don Tilden played. The
pattern is set for the festival, one that will be followed for four decades: jam
sessions, tributes and not much be-bop. Miles Davis turns up at a jam session
with Thelonious Monk and plays " 'Round Midnight. " The performance is so
impressive Columbia Records wants to sign him on the spot.



1956: Duke Ellington's orchestra wakes up after nearly a decade of intermittent
activity when the tenor saxophonist Paul Gonsalves tears up the concert with 27
choruses of "Diminuendo and Crescendo in Blue." The event helps bring a new
audience to Ellington. And Mr. Wein does something tricky. He invites critics to
suggest worthy performers for the festival as a way of tempering criticism.

1957: The festival grows from two days and nights to four. Mainstream artists
dominate the stage, among them Jack Teagarden, Louis Armstrong, Sidney Bechet,
Ruby Braff, Stan Getz, Erroll Garner, Teddy Wilson and the Count Basie
Orchestra. The 1960's arrive three years early with a perfromance by the Cecil
Taylor quartet, featuring Steve Lacey, the beginning of the avant-garde's
on-again, off-again status.

1958: The festival is captured on film. "Jazz on a Summer's Day" is shot at the
event's new location, Freebody Park, a baseball field opposite the Newport
Casino. With images of people sitting in lawn chairs and snapping their fingers,
the film shows jazz as a national pastime and demonstrates a pre-Vietnam
innocence that would seem impossible in future years.

1959: The Four Freshman appear, marking the start of a trend to incorporate pop
and rock for commercial purposes. What began as a jazz festival has become a
music festival, something that, to varying degrees, it would remain.

THE 1960'S

1960: The festival is scheduled to run for four days, but rowdy fans force it to
shut down after three. College students, not particularly interested in jazz,
have come to Newport because of the party atmosphere. Such performers as Charles
Mingus, Jo Jones, Kenny Dorham and Ornette Coleman stage a rump festival at
another Newport location to protest Mr. Wein's seeming exclusion of the
avant-garde.

1965: The festival has been in a rut, but what a rut. Mr. Wein has been leaning
heavily on the same performers year after year, including Thelonious Monk and
Dizzy Gillespie. But this year the inclusion of avant-garde artists wakes things
up; performers include the Jazz Composer's Orchestra, the Archie Folk and blues
acts like Muddy Waters, Memphis Slim and Willie Dixon make appearances. John
Coltrane's legendary group performs, along with Miles Davis's great 1960's band.


1969: Mr. Wein finally succumbs to the rock onslaught. He has tried the
avant-garde, gospel, blues and the venerable Stan Getz, and he's still losing
money. The avant-gardists Sunny Murray and Sun Ra are joined by the rock stars
Jethro Tull, Ten Years After, Jeff Beck, John Mayall, Mothers of Invention, Sly
and the Family Stone, James Brown, Johnny Winter, Led Zeppelin and Blood, Sweat
and Tears. The event suggests the festival of the future.

THE 1970'S

1971: More rowdyism. College students demand free music, and the grounds are
stormed as Dionne Warwick sings "What the World Needs Now."

1972: Because of the previous year's disturbances, the festival moves to New
York, and the atmosphere changes completely. No longer is it an outdoor event,
with group after group sharing a stage. Performances are held at locations
around the city including Carnegie Hall, Radio City and Yankee Stadium and on
the Staten Island Ferry. Yet the lineup remains extraordinary, and varied. Sarah
Vaughan shows up, as do the Modern Jazz Quartet, Mary Lou Williams, Charlie
Haden's Liberation Orchestra and Lionel Hampton, to name a few.

1973: The roster of performers has become increasingly broad and bizarre. The
rock group Mandrill shares the stage with Duke Ellington. One bill includes the
rhythm-and-blues pianist Professor Longhair, Charles Mingus, Don Cherry and the
New Orleans guitarist Snooks Eaglin, plus a handful of great tap dancers.

THE 1980's

1981: The first sighting of Wynton Marsalis, 19, who appears in a tribute to Art
Blakey. The presence of Mr. Marsalis, along with James Williams, Billy Pierce
and Bobby Watson, is the initial sign of a jazz renaissance. Tribute concerts
become an even bigger deal as the old guard passes on.

1984: Miles Davis's reappearance after a long period of retirement was an
occasion. Wynton Marsalis plays with his own group and becomes the only young
regular on the festival.

1986: A particularly dull year as the jazz world remains trapped between
generations. Herbie Hancock's band features Branford Marsalis and O.T.B., a
record-label concoction of young musicians. The rest of the festival consists of
either critically scorned pop jazz - Miles Davis paired with Spyro Gyra - or
tributes, featuring mainstream jazz.

THE 1990's

1991: Young musicians finally gain prominence at two important concerts, "Swing:
40 and Under" and "Be-bop: 40 and Under." Along with appearances by Wynton
Marsalis and the Jazz Futures, the festial begins to reflect what is really
going on in jazz.

1994: The scope of the festival shrinks dramaticaly, from 29 concerts in 1992 to
14 in 1994. The younger musicians do not yet have enough drawing power to bring
in large audiences, and not enough elder statemen are left to fill the big
halls. In one departure, Mr. Wein offers four days of free concerts at Bryant
Park. And the booking is more varied; he uses muscians tied to the avant-garde
like Thomas Chapin, George Gruntz and Julius Hemphill, all of whom go over well
with the crowd. A young mainstream represented by Terence Blanchard and David
Sanchez appear, too. It's the future, and Mr. Wein will repeat the formula this
year.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: An overview, above, of the Newport Jazz Festival of 1954. At
left, the police hustle rioters away in 1960. (John T. Hopf and Associated
Press); Anita O'Day in a film on the event. (New Yorker Films); Sly Stone
performed in 1969. Zoot Sims, Clark Terry, Joe Newman and Illinois Jacquet at
Yankee Stadium in 1972. (David Gahr); Dizzie Gillespie, above, performing at
Carnegie Hall during the festival of 1972. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York
Times); At right, listeners at last year's festival in Bryant Park in Manhattan.
(David Gahr)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              291 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL

BYLINE: By Ted Conover;    Ted Conover is the author of "Rolling Nowhere," an
account of his travels on freight trains, and "Coyotes: A Journey Through the
Secret World of America's Illegal Aliens."

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 9;   Column 1;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3038 words


ONE truism about travel of any kind is that you often remember your companions
at least as well as the places you go. In literary travel, a first-person genre,
choice of companion is especially important: you can't ditch your tour guide and
still finish the trip. This season's books tend toward the outdoorsy, the rough
and rugged; the following selection will let you explore two rivers in the
United States or wander off to Baja California, Moscow, East Africa or northern
Alaska. You can travel by canoe, bicycle or 18-wheeler truck, and with guides
who are just as diverse. Some will educate, entertain and edify; others you may
wish to throttle.

The best writing can be found in Robin Cody's VOYAGE OF A SUMMER SUN: Canoeing
the Columbia River (Knopf, $23). Mr. Cody, a novelist and freelance writer,
paddled a canoe from the Canadian headwaters of the Columbia down to his home in
Portland, Ore., and on to the Pacific Ocean. "The story," he says right up
front, "is the Columbia River, not the canoe and me, but I've learned that
friends can't hear me tell about the river until they know why I was out there."
He takes care to point out that "this is not an adventure story, although some
adventure was unavoidable, and I didn't set out to find myself if I could help
it." Thank God! The travel-narrative-cum-voyage-of-self-discovery is by now such
a cliche that it should be outlawed. Trips need to carry their own weight, and
this one does.

Mr. Cody grew up along the rivers of western Oregon, and he cares about them in
a way that distinguishes him from any tourist. A broad knowledge of river
biology, engineering, geology and agriculture transforms his meanderings into
meditations on the river and humankind. He treats the salmon swimming invisibly
beneath him as fellow travelers, for example, recalling an incident from his
boyhood when some young salmon escaped from a local hatchery, making their way
down a cruddy ravine into the main river before they could be properly released
into a small stream. Four years later, he pulled over on his bike to see why
traffic was backed up on the highway; he was "expecting a wreck, and found the
true horror down at riverside. Adult fall chinook -- long as your leg, thick as
your torso -- were beaching themselves into a muddy trickle from the place
they'd been raised. It was awful. These salmon would go nowhere but home, where
they couldn't go."

Though Mr. Cody doesn't part with a lot of personal information, by the end of
the book we have a strong sense of his personality. The tone of his writing is
beautifully summed up by his closing passage, which takes place at a boat basin
in Astoria:

"The world wasn't awake yet. I pulled the canoe onto the dock, just glad the
trip was over. The satisfaction of having come a long way hadn't caught up with
me. If I'd been in the mood for a crowning act, it would have been to fill the
canoe with rocks and sink it to the riverbed. A bright-eyed yachtsman with a
steaming mug of coffee came down the gangplank in deck shoes and captain's cap.
He noticed my odd equipment for this place.

" 'How long you been on the river?' he asked.

"The answer came floating up like a long-submerged log from a forgotten pool.
Not 82 days, not just a whole summer, but Since I was little."

It is the misfortune of Peter Lourie to be publishing his own canoeing story
shortly after Mr. Cody's. RIVER OF MOUNTAINS: A Canoe Journey Down the Hudson
(Syracuse University, $29.95), which will be available in July, is one of that
unfortunate breed of travel narrative that gets written, all too transparently,
because the writer needs to do a book. Feeling penned in after his first year of
fatherhood, Mr. Lourie (who directs the summer writing program at the University
of Vermont) looked for an adventure close to his home in Beacon, N.Y. Nobody had
ever canoed the entire Hudson, he discovered -- well, not if you counted the
beginning as Lake Tear of the Clouds, a high Adirondack source that you can't
paddle down from. In fact, you have to carry a canoe nine miles if you want to
reach it. We might forgive Mr. Lourie this stunt if he hadn't hired a river
guide, who carried the canoe for him.

Other short cuts abound. Lacking confidence as a canoeist, Mr. Lourie cedes key
decision making to his guide, including the choice not to paddle the Hudson's
biggest white water. He spends nights at the guide's house instead of in his
tent, and then three more at his own home. There are the obligatory excerpts
from the writings of Those Who Passed This Way Before, and the equally
obligatory Conversations With Locals, like the tenders of the Hudson locks, but
none are memorable.

In effect, the book tour starts the day Mr. Lourie leaves: he has allied
himself, for publicity purposes, with John Cronin, who calls himself the Hudson
Riverkeeper and acts as a sort of nonprofit watchdog. At journey's end, a press
conference at Battery Park in Manhattan will promote both Mr. Lourie's feat and
the Riverkeeper's idea that "my river today is your river tomorrow" -- and Mr.
Lourie tailors all his paddling to arrive at the right time. He refuses,
however, to promote the environmentalist agenda too high up the river; lumber
companies, it turns out, own land he must portage across, and he doesn't want to
make waves.

As he floats under the George Washington Bridge, Mr. Lourie is pondering not the
history of spans over the Hudson but whether CNN cameras will be filming him
from above, as promised. (They aren't.) It's a fitting close.

Rounding out the suite of nautical excursions is Peter Jenkins's ALONG THE EDGE
OF AMERICA (Rutledge Hill, $19.95). In this latest installment of what might be
called "A Walk Across America Inc.," Mr. Jenkins spurns the woodsy
environmentalist thing and buys not a canoe but a twin-engine oceangoing
speedboat. His destination: "The Gulf Coast!"

SEARCHING hard for the inner journey angle, Mr. Jenkins pegs this trip as the
answer to a midlife crisis and opens his book with the service of divorce papers
from his wife, Barbara -- the "Blue Highways" beginning. But you soon figure out
that he had divorced and remarried, and even had another child, before the trip
ever started. This self-dramatizing is the Waterloo of an otherwise appealing
traveler: Mr. Jenkins has a winning style and an unmatched willingness to engage
with strangers, even scary ones like Billy and Red, two swamp-dwelling brothers
in the Florida Panhandle. But he loses my trust with his melodrama, as he did in
his hugely successful first book, "A Walk Across America," when he had the
presence of mind to make sure someone with a flash took a picture of the tears
streaming down his face as he lowered the body of his beloved half-malamute,
Cooper, into a forest grave.

Not content to let dead dogs lie, Mr. Jenkins resurrects Cooper as the name of
his new speedboat. Ticking off the famous landmarks he hopes to see along
America's third coast, he adds, "Best of all, I knew there would be countless
lesser-known places that would earn a place in my heart." That's a pretty good
summary, though Mr. Jenkins's sea of American niceness is relieved by the
appearance of some lowdown hijackers off the Texas coast. What he does to them
will surprise you.

It would be fun to get Peter Jenkins together with the imperious, opinionated
Irish travel writer Dervla Murphy. How long would their trip last? In THE UKIMWI
ROAD: From Kenya to Zimbabwe (Overlook, $22.95), which will be in stores in a
month, Ms. Murphy is on a bicycle ride envisioned as "self-prescribed unwinding
therapy . . . a carefree ramble through some of the least hot areas of
sub-Saharan Africa." What she finds (and you can't believe she didn't expect
this, given her worldliness) is the alarming reality that all along the route
people are dying of ukimwi, Kiswahili for AIDS.

Ms. Murphy is a very political traveler, which is both the pleasure and the pain
of this book. In her frequent encounters with locals, between 80-mile days of
cycling on her mountain bike (which she calls Lear), she assesses the various
multinational efforts to assist the pandemic's victims and finds them wanting --
as she does, indeed, most incursions of the first world in Africa, from
Coca-Cola to backpacking youths bearing Lonely Planet guidebooks. "The
too-familiar stench of white self-serving hangs about the setting up of the
Mikumi Training College" is a typical jab. Locals always seem to agree with her
concerns. Refreshing at first -- why don't more American travel writers exercise
their critical faculties? -- these tirades against sexism and the postcolonial
order wear thin by book's end.

What keeps us pedaling alongside Ms. Murphy is her indomitable will, her
unabashed love of beer and her almost Monty-Python-like stiff upper lip,
manifested here in a seemly refusal to dwell on the little annoyances she finds
in a landscape of widespread plague. Even when malaria ends her journey, just
inside Zimbabwe, Ms. Murphy does not whimper for sympathy. The exception is when
she eats a terrible meal; after a while, I began looking forward to her next
gastronomic disappointment: "In a small airless restaurant, smelling of singed
feathers and stale urine, I was the only customer. My mountain of matoke was
enlivened by the leg of a geriatric hen who had died of malnutrition."

A VERY different sort of wanderer from the British Isles is Graham Mackintosh,
the author of INTO A DESERT PLACE: A 3000 Mile Walk Around the Coast of Baja
California (Norton, paper, $14). A teacher at a technical college in England,
Mr. Mackintosh took a trip to California and Mexico and, after hitchhiking down
the coast, was unable to get Baja out of his mind. He couldn't explain his
fixation, other than to cite a slogan from a poster: "A Ship Is Safe in Harbor
but That Is Not What Ships Are For." Back in Kent, he writes, "Even the sheep
seemed to be saying Baja."

Armed with gobs of sunscreen, quarts of contact lens solution and a few phrases
of Spanish, Mr. Mackintosh heads off to conquer the coast. His setbacks are
legion; rocky cliffs block his way when the tide is up, and often when it's
down, necessitating much backtracking. Snakes, scorpions, spiders and stingrays
(all exhaustively catalogued) are a constant peril. Fortunately, American
tourists are conveniently spaced en route, most of them with coolers full of
beer; farther south, Mexicans in remote fishing camps open their shacks to him.

In a most endearing way, Mr. Mackintosh develops a fondness for the evidently
delicious fruit of the pitahaya cactus, which he stops to eat as often as
possible, describing every occasion in mouthwatering detail. "I chose to walk
the inland valleys in the hope of finding more pitahayas," he confesses in his
diary. "Soon found a grove and helped myself to the ripe, red balls of fluffy
sweetness. Juice oozing out. I ate five or six. Progress slow. I had to force
myself to go on, leaving many behind." Toward the end of his trek, spread over
two years, he acquires a burro named Bonny, recalcitrant of course; his
descriptions of Bonny provide another avenue of insight into his character. Mr.
Mackintosh is not much of a writer, but -- in his cutoffs and tube socks,
nursing a chronic sunburn -- he makes a great traveling companion.

So, at least for a while, does Graham Coster, a former editor of Granta. He
notes that from a cultural standpoint the world of long-haul truckers is sorely
neglected and, in A THOUSAND MILES FROM NOWHERE: Trucking Two Continents (North
Point/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20), sets out to rectify the situation. After a
week in truck-driving school, he joins a British driver named Tony on a trip
across Europe, delivering beer and frozen Cornish pasties to an ersatz pub in
Moscow. There's nothing glam here: the endless border crossings, linguistic
difficulties and a succession of gray days are well described but depressing. We
don't learn much about Tony, but we do find that the truckers of England and the
United States have something in common. "Huge wrecked weary men sat around,
slumped and sated with huge meals," Mr. Coster writes of the scene at a big new
truck stop in Essex. "Truckworld remains the only place in the world where I
have seen men eating lasagna with rice and chips and potatoes, and finishing the
meal off with a Himalayan bowl of fruit crumble and custard."

When he crosses the Atlantic for a couple of long hauls in the real land of
truckers, the CB radio culture, huge sleeper cabs and immense spaces of the West
impress him more than they will most American readers. He does, however, capture
the essence of this world: what it's like to be well traveled and yet have seen
nothing, what it's like to be a rugged individualist always on the run for some
big freight company. His last trip is a killer. "For the first time in the
States," he admits, "the ride felt unexalted, attritional: this wasn't a proud
owner of a chromium steed allowing his services to be hired; this time it was a
tired guy being catapulted out on to another long, long road . . . and we were
still at the start." Alas, there are three chapters to go. Mr. Coster is reduced
to telling us what happens at selected mileage signs and providing overlong
digressions on the music he plays on the tape deck. In the end, even his keen
wit and sharp sense of irony cannot rescue us from sheer tedium, the same thing
truckers hate most.

Adding a new wrinkle to the "in the footsteps of" genre, Douglas Preston, his
fiancee, Christine, and Christine's daughter, Selene, set off to retrace on
horseback the steps of a mythical personage, Monster Slayer, of Navajo lore.
TALKING TO THE GROUND: One Family's Journey on Horseback Across the Sacred Land
of the Navajo (Simon & Schuster, $24), which will be published next month,
begins with Mr. Preston meeting Christine for the first time, at a gallery
opening in southern Colorado, and presents as a subplot to a difficult trip the
question of whether Selene, stung by the abandonment of her father, will come to
accept a replacement.

Mr. Preston has been interested in Navajo mythology since he worked at the
American Museum of Natural History in New York, and he makes an enthusiastic and
informative guide. Long passages are given over to the Dine Bahane, the Navajo
creation story, and to the land in which it developed, which stretches beyond
the present-day reservation through an area known as the Four Corners, where New
Mexico, Colorado, Utah and Arizona come together. Much in evidence, naturally
enough, is the tale of Monster Slayer, who killed off the savage alien god
Deelgeed and other dark forces before sparing Old Age Woman, the Poverty
Creatures, Old Man Hunger and Cold Woman. The Navajos Mr. Preston meets along
the way educate him on parts of the story he doesn't know; for me, it was a
wonderful surprise to learn of the continued significance of the Dine Bahane.

Mr. Preston's excursions into myth are leavened by his narrative passages, in
particular those involving 9-year-old Selene, who has brought along her Game Boy
and a saddlebag full of candy. The relationship between Selene and Mr. Preston,
which grows warmer under the strains of the trip, rings very true. By the end,
we're glad that she's calling him not "Doug" but "Dad."

A highlight of this trip, for the reader, happens also to be the most awkward
for the author: at a reservation visitor center, Mr. Preston is introduced to a
beer-drinking Navajo who says, "In the white man's war you call Vietnam, I saw
my own brother blown away right in front of my eyes." Sizing up Mr. Preston, he
remarks: "Nice Navajo belt buckle you got on. And I bet you got no idea what it
means." As Mr. Preston tries to escape, the man suddenly turns friendly, telling
him tales of Monster Slayer and giving him an eagle feather from his hatband.
The difficulty of the encounter shows how, paradoxically, a white writer might
have easier access to the sacred knowledge of the tribe than to the spirit of
modern-day Navajos themselves.

SPIRITUALITY -- more specifically, the interior life in the great outdoors -- is
also the subject of Jean Aspen's ARCTIC SON (Menasha Ridge, $19.95). When she
was 42, Ms. Aspen, her husband, Tom, and their 6-year-old son, Luke, left
Arizona to spend more than a year homesteading in the Brooks Range of Alaska.
Along with their nanny, Laurie, the daughter of a friend from Seattle, they
built a simple log cabin, caught fish and shot moose for food, and sought the
things people still seek from the wilderness.

That wilderness is vividly rendered, but, unlike other travelers, Ms. Aspen is
most interested in the creation of a new home and the relationships of a family.
Pioneering on a remote riverbank, surrounded by flies and mosquitoes ("One
inevitably gets two to three hundred bites a day in this country in early
summer, even wearing repellent and protective clothing"), not to mention having
to build a house from scratch before winter sets in, turns out to be terribly
stressful, and Ms. Aspen is unflinching in describing the toll that is taken on
everyone.

There are also some unexpected disturbances in this utopian experiment, caused
by the nanny's boyfriend, who charters a plane to come visit for a couple of
uncomfortable weeks; by pneumonia, which racks the overworked Tom; and by an
aggressive bear, which charges the Aspens. On the other hand, they get what they
came for. The countryside was, Ms. Aspen writes, "an overwhelming presence in
our lives. There was a deep energy about it that impinged on even the busiest
mind, slowing it to an older rhythm. We became quieter and gentler as the days
passed. A sense of peace prevailed in our lives."

Ms. Aspen (the author of "Arctic Daughter," a book about an earlier Alaska
journey) is a searcher, looking for her proper place in the world, and her book
is an earnest collection of dictums for good living. Still, a lot of them do
make sense ("Wealth, I was discovering, is more accurately measured in what you
enjoy than in what you possess"). I was grateful, after the contrivances that
beset so much travel writing, for the directness and honesty of this author's
voice.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              292 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

IN PERFORMANCE;
THEATER

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C;     Page 12;     Column 6;     Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 282 words



Handing Down Strife
By the Generations
'John and Jen'
Lamb's Theater

In the tear-jerking finale of "John and Jen," a musical that covers 40 years of
family history, a mother sings to her rebellious teen-age son:

I pushed you too hard

I loved you too strong

I went for it all

But I somehow went wrong.
 This blunt psychologizing typifies the tone of "John and Jen," a well-made show
with music by Andrew Lippa and lyrics by Tom Greenwald that sporadically catches
fire despite a story bordering on cliche.

Smoothly directed by Gabriel Barre at the Lamb's Theater, "John and Jen" is a
marathon exercise for its two talented performers, Carolee Carmello and James
Ludwig, who play a sister and brother in the first act and a mother and son in
the second. In a beautifully modulated performance, Ms. Carmello, who has the
more rewarding role of Jen, metamorphoses from little girl to hippie college
student to matronly single mother. Mr. Ludwig, who plays Jen's brother John, who
is killed in Vietnam, and the son (also named John), only has to mature to the
age of 19.

In its most emotional moments, "John and Jen" rekindles the battles of the
1960's, when the Vietnam War tore families apart. The villain of the piece is an
abusive father who is mentioned but unseen. The story illustrates how family
strife is handed down from generation to generation.

Mr. Lippa's music, instead of imitating pop trends, adheres to a modernist
Broadway style that is melodic but not strongly tuneful. Although the lyrics
often sit heavily on the music, they are direct and unpretentious.

"John and Jen" is serious, well meaning and ultimately bland.
   STEPHEN HOLDEN

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As Carolee Carmello matures, James Ludwig plays first her
brother, who is killed in Vietnam, then her son. (Diane Sobolewski/"John and
Jen")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              293 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Full Ties to Hanoi Urged

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 157 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


Secretary of State Warren Christopher has formally recommended that President
Clinton establish full diplomatic relations with Vietnam, senior Administration
officials said today.

Although Mr. Christopher's recommendation was sent to the White House last week,
it has not yet been sent to Mr. Clinton and remains on the desk of Anthony Lake,
the national security adviser, the officials said. Mr. Clinton is not expected
to make a decision on the politically sensitive issue soon, they added.

Winston Lord, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs,
recommended normalization last month after Hanoi released hundreds of pages of
documents from its archives on missing American serviceman to a Presidential
delegation visiting Hanoi.

Last January, Washington and Hanoi established low-level relations through
liaison offices in each other's capitals, but without full diplomatic relations
or embassy status.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              294 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Deports 100 Vietnamese Refugees

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Vietnamese woman struggled with officials in Hanoi yesterday
and other refugees refused to leave the airplane after it landed in Vietnam.
Hong Kong deported 100 refugees and tried to persuade the remaining 21,000
asylum-seekers that they were unlikely to be resettled in the United States.
(Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              295 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 16, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section D;  Page 20;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1235 words


Sony Wonder's "Pocahontas" may not rate the crowd of 100,000 that attended the
premiere of the Disney version in Central Park last weekend, but the 48-minute
animated film is of significance to a company that is rapidly becoming a major
presence in children's video and television entertainment.

"When we began a couple of years ago, we went out and got our tent poles," said
Becky Mancuso, the senior vice president for creative affairs of Sony Wonder,
the children's video arm of Sony. Propping up the company's tent are the video
licensing rights to children's programming on the Nickelodeon cable channel;
Nick Jr., Nickelodeon's morning programs for pre-schoolers; "Puzzle Place," the
PBS show, and, most recently, "Sesame Street."

Starring an attractive, plucky adolescent who has an eagle for a mentor,
"Pocahontas" is one of a series of Sony Wonder animated films that go directly
to video stores. The tape was released in April; in May the series added "The
Prince and the Pauper."

Other Sony Wonder videos include the animated "Tales From the Cryptkeeper," from
ABC, and two live-action series, "See How They Grow" and "My First," adapted
from children's books published by Dorling Kindersley.

At present there are more than 100 Sony Wonder titles in stores, and the supply
is quickly growing. On Tuesday, for example, there were fresh titles from
Nickelodeon's "Rocko's Modern Life" and "Ren and Stimpy." Another new release is
"Are You Afraid of the Dark? The Tale of Cutter's Treasure," a one-hour
Nickelodeon special starring Charles Dutton. On June 27 there will be "My First
Party" and "My First Magic" from the Dorling Kindersley series.

Next month Sony Wonder will inaugurate its Nick Jr. series with episodes of
"Allegra's Window," "Gullah Gullah Island" and "Eureeka's Castle." In August,
there will be Nickelodeon's "Tales From the Whoop: Hot Rod Brown, Class Clown,"
starring Whoopi Goldberg.

"We figured we needed leading brands to break into the market," said Ted Green,
the general manager of Sony Wonder.

With the brand names in place, however, Ms. Mancuso is looking inward for future
programming that Sony Wonder might send straight to video or develop for
television before video release. "We're concentrating on developing stuff on our
own," she said. Projects being considered include video and television
adaptations of literary properties, a line of tapes for older children drawn
from comic books and video games, sports titles, a series of videos based on
famous legends, and shows with families of characters.

The advantage to developing one's own video and television properties, Ms.
Mancuso added, is that one isn't beholden to anyone else's. "With licenses,
there are expiration dates you are bound to," she said, and described a future
in which many children's shows will be made up as they go along. "It's good to
own shows because some day parents and kids will pull up their own programming
and create their own program blocks," she said. "It's good to own the pieces and
not just distribute the videos."

New Releases

Little Women
1994. Columbia Tri-Star. $100.71. Laser disk, $34.95. 118 minutes. PG. Release
date: Tuesday.

Gillian Armstrong's vibrant adaptation of Louisa May Alcott's novel has a sure
feel for the familial, particularly the strength of sisterly ties. Led by Jo
(Winona Ryder), the most spirited sister, and their idealistic mother (Susan
Sarandon), the four March girls grow to womanhood in a time when life was more
imbued with earnest beliefs and intellectual vigor. Nevertheless, a keen humor
and practicality keep the story in focus for modern audiences, resulting in an
enchantingly pretty film that, Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times, "is so
potent that it prompts a rush of recognition from the opening frame."

Dumb and Dumber
1994. New Line. $102.65. 110 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13. Release date:
Tuesday.

The maniacal, rubber-faced Jim Carrey teams with Jeff Daniels in a story that
might have been called "Beavis and Butt-head Go West." When their careers go
bust, a limousine driver (Mr. Carrey) and a dog groomer (Mr. Daniels) take off
for Aspen, Colo., in a van shaped like a sheep dog. In the van there is also a
briefcase full of ransom money sought by pursuing thugs. That's all the setup
that is needed for a string of gags ranging from unsavory toilet mishaps to a
striking appearance by the pair in orange and powder blue formal wear. Nothing
makes sense, but then the mission here was to make "a movie that fully lives up
to its name" (Stephen Holden).

Camilla
1994. Miramax. $97.51. 91 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13. Relase date:
Tuesday.

In one of her final roles, Jessica Tandy is given center stage (and stage right
and stage left) as an octogenarian and former concert performer who lives on a
Georgia island, goes fishing and skinny-dipping and embroiders memories of her
life and career. She is joined by Freda (Bridget Fonda), a young musician and
foil for Camilla's tales, and together the two make a creative and spiritual
pilgrimage to Canada. Hume Cronyn makes an appearance as a returned lost love,
but this is Ms. Tandy's show and she sustains "an otherwise treacly film that
wouldn't work without her" (Maslin).

Far From Home: The Adventures of Yellow Dog
1994. Fox. $19.98. 80 minutes. Closed captioned. PG.

After a storm at sea, a boy (Jesse Bradford) and his dog (Yellow) get washed up
on a remote Canadian island and spend three weeks eating bugs, battling wolves,
crossing 200-foot-deep gorges on logs and keeping each other going until help
arrives. All of this could have escalated into an overripe survival adventure,
but although there is perhaps an overabundance of resilience, sentimentality is
kept to a minimum in a film that "finds an exhilarating balance between images
of nature's fury and its beauty" (Holden).

And Keep in Mind

From Frankenstein To Dorothy Parker

As usual, best-renter lists are crowded with films that are having more success
in video stores than they did in theaters. Here are some examples from
Billboard's list.

CLERKS. Kevin Smith's film finds a lot going on at the local convenience store
and video outlet. 1994. Miramax. $97.51. 92 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

MARY SHELLEY'S FRANKENSTEIN. Kenneth Branagh's film, with himself as Victor
Frankenstein, is more of a Gothic fairy tale than a horror film. 1994. Columbia
Tri-Star. $98.32. 123 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

BLUE SKY. Jessica Lange won an Oscar for her performance as the steamy,
manic-depressive wife of an Army officer (Tommy Lee Jones) in Tony Richardson's
film. 1994. Orion. $97.51. 101 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

MRS. PARKER AND THE VICIOUS CIRCLE. Alan Rudolph's film has an effective
portrayal of the writer by Jennifer Jason Leigh, but is otherwise overloaded
with name-dropping and Algonquin Round Table quips. 1994. New Line. $95.92. 124
minutes. Closed captioned. R.

RUDYARD KIPLING'S 'THE JUNGLE BOOK.' Disney's live-action version of the
classic, with Scott Lee as Mowgli the jungle boy, has a hint of Beverly Hills
but is saved by its energy and picturesque wildlife. 1994. Disney. $22.99. 111
minutes. Closed captioned. PG.

THE WAR. A Vietnam veteran (Kevin Costner) has trouble adjusting to civilian
life in Juliette, Miss. 1994. MCA/Universal. $95.92. 126 minutes. Closed
captioned. PG-13.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from "Allegra's Window" (that's Allegra at right), a
cable-television series on Nick Jr. being released on video by Sony Wonder. (Tom
Hurst/Nickelodeon)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              296 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Skowhegan Journal;
Remembering a Senator They Called Their Own

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 801 words

DATELINE: SKOWHEGAN, Me., June 16


At 8:10 this morning, Marion Knight, who is 93 years old, sat down at her piano
in her house on Mechanic Street and played "Peg o' My Heart," the same song she
had played at the wedding, 65 years ago, of her friend Margaret Chase Smith.

At Charrier's Family Restaurant, where several times a week Margaret Chase Smith
dropped in and ordered the same $1.95 lunch -- grilled cheese on whole wheat
bread, burned -- Brenda Charrier placed a red rose and a framed picture of Mrs.
Smith in a blue silk dress and pearls on her usual table.

And at the Skowhegan Public Library, the head librarian, Helen Shaw, remembered
Margaret Chase Smith, the United States Senator she knew personally, the Senator
who came to the phone when Mrs. Shaw, or anyone else in her family, called.

"I had a son whose Navy ship was torpedoed during the Vietnam War," Mrs. Shaw
said as she sat at her desk this afternoon, down the hill from the house where
Mrs. Smith lived and where she died last month and where today her friends
gathered to honor her.

"We heard about it on the radio," Mrs. Shaw recalled. "We couldn't reach anyone
in the Navy. My mother called Margaret in Washington. She came right to the
phone. I'll never forget: It was a quarter to five on a Thursday. She took a
taxi to the Pentagon and got this list of the dead, and she called us back and
said he wasn't on the list."

"I told my husband, 'If she runs until she's 100, I'll vote for her.' "

She was 97 when she died.

Before political polls and consultants, before elections driven by television
advertising and big money, before politicians who never stop campaigning, there
was Margaret Chase Smith. She belonged to this mill town beside the Kennebec
River.

Call Margaret. That was what people here used to say back when Mrs.  Smith was
in Washington and they needed help.

The eldest of six children of a barber, she wanted to be a gym teacher, but her
family did not have the money to send her to college. She was born here, and
married here, and even after she went to Washington, she always came home. It
was at her kitchen table here that she wrote her "declaration of conscience"
speech in 1950 denouncing the tactics of a fellow Republican, Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy of Wisconsin.

And so today, with her trademark red roses blooming in the Margaret Chase Smith
garden, and more roses festooning shop windows on Main Street, her friends here
and others from around the state paid tribute.

The Governor of Maine, Angus King, was here today, along with the state's two
Republican Senators, Olympia J. Snowe and William S. Cohen. Governor King, an
independent, spoke of "the two giants" that Maineproduced at mid-century -- Mrs.
Smith and Edmund S. Muskie, the former Governor, Senator and Vice Presidential
candidate.

Mr. Muskie, who attended the tribute, remembered when he was the state's
freshman Senator and Margaret Chase Smith was the senior Senator. "She was a
formidable political figure," said Mr. Muskie, who is 81 and still practicing
law in Washington. "There was a standard, a challenge."

Mrs. Smith was 12 years old when she got her first job, at the five-and-ten-cent
store in Skowhegan. She worked as a maid, a telephone operator, a teacher in a
one-room schoolhouse, a recorder of town tax payments, as coach of the Skowhegan
girls' basketball team, as office manager for the now-defunct weekly Independent
Reporter, and as executive secretary for her husband, Clyde Smith, who was
elected to the House in 1936.

She entered politics when her husband died in 1940, winning a special election
for his seat. She was elected to the Senate in 1948 and served 24 years, losing
in a bid for a fifth term in 1972. Up until the end, said her lawyer and
longtime friend, Merton G. Henry, she had never taken a poll, nor done
television advertising.

Mrs. Smith was frugal and independent, as Mainers are supposed to be. She did
not accept campaign contributions. It made things difficult for her campaign
workers.

"Some us had to be very devious about getting campaign posters," said Mr. Henry,
who volunteered to work in Mrs. Smith's first Senate campaign. "We had to use
our own money without violating any laws."

But Mrs. Smith did indulge in one extravagance in her last five years, Mr. Henry
said. She bought a blue Cadillac to replace her two-door Oldsmobile, which her
legions of friends were having trouble getting in and out of.

"The day she bought it she called me worried that people would think she was
getting uppity," Mr. Henry said. "It became the Cadillac that 'Mert Henry made
me buy.' "

Uppity is not a word anyone in Skowhegan connects with Mrs.  Smith, although she
wore a dress or suit with pearls and high heels everyday. What she was, Helen
Shaw, the librarian, said, was a lady.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Neighbors in Skowhegan, Me., and admirers from around Maine
gathered yesterday to remember Margaret Chase Smith, their former United States
Senator, who died last month at 97. Alice Souther, who taught at the Margaret
Chase Smith School in Skowhegan, wiped a tear during a memorial service.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              297 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Long Island Remembers Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 22;   Column 2;   Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A replica of the Vietnam memorial in Washington has been set up
outside Babylon's Town Hall until Sunday. The wall, etched with 58,000 names of
soldiers who died in the war, is two-thirds the size of the Washington memorial.
At a ceremony tonight, the names of the dead from Babylon and nearby towns will
be read. William English, right, made a rubbing of the name of his cousin,
Francis M. Curry. (Steve Hart for The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              298 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 17; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 889 words



FAMILY VALUES

In 1928 folks in the United States were having a lot of trouble with family
values. Take "The Wild Party," a scandalous book-length poem by Joseph Mancure
March that portrayed amoral city life in the jazz age and was as successful as
it was scorned. Considered a cult classic, it was re-published last year in an
uncensored form, and now it has been turned into a shadow puppet production at
the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center's National Puppetry Conference.

Larry Reed, a performance artist and practitioner of the Balinese shadow puppet
art, devised this black and white production with life-sized cutouts carried on
the actors' shoulders, and an accompaniment of live jazz.

Performances are scheduled on Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M. in the Rufus and
Margo Rose Theater on the grounds at 305 Great Neck Road in Waterford. Tickets,
at $7.50, may be reserved by calling 443-1238.

BEECHER REUNION

The Beechers are having a reunion in Hartford on Saturday from 6 to 8 P.M., and
the public is invited free of charge. There will be tours of the Harriet Beecher
Stowe House, at 77 Forest Street, and dramatic readings of 19th-century family
letters, followed by a dance recital by the Vintage Dance Society at Immanuel
Church across the street.

The Rev. Lyman Beecher, 1775-1863, founder of the clan, was New England's
best-known minister in his time, and like many early Americans fathered a large
family. "Beecher's Dozen" they were called, although there were only 11 of them.
All of his seven sons followed him into the ministry and added to their father's
lustrous reputation for improving the quality of early to mid-19th-century life
by promoting education, abolition and temperance.

His daughters were no slouches either. Harriet Beecher Stowe left "Uncle Tom's
Cabin" and many more literary works in a 50-year career. Two sisters, Catherine
and Mary, founded the Hartford Female Seminary, while a third, Isabella, lobbied
the state legislature to pass an 1877 bill guaranteeing women the same property
rights as men.

The Beechers had their first reunion in 1859. Between then and now only one
other was held, in 1983. As of May 31, Beechers from 10 states and Canada had
registered for the 1995 reunion, and many more are expected. For more
information, call 522-9258.

ART OPENINGS

The Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan has no fewer than four openings
in progress today, with simultaneous receptions scheduled from 2 to 4 P.M.; the
galleries will be open from 1 to 5 P.M.

Gordon Micunis's painted tapestries and James Jackson Burt's sculptures and
painted ceramics are in the main gallery; Jane de Jonge's mixed-media sculpture
will be in the Farrell Gallery, and an exhibition of one-foot-square works by
guild artists will occupy the Vassos Gallery.

All four exhibitions will remain on view through July 16. Viewing hours are
Wednesday through Saturday from 11 to 5, Sunday from 1 to 5. The center is at
1037 Silvermine Road and admission is free. The gallery phone number for more
information is 966-5617.

HALF-MARATHON>HE>

 The 15th annual ConnectiCare Fairfield Half-Marathon steps off at 8:30 A.M.
next Sunday on Fairfield's Jennings Beach. A 5-kilometer and Family Fun Run
begin at 8:40 A.M. All races finish back at the beach.

Runners on the scenic 13.1 mile course will be aided by 275 Girl Scouts at eight
water stations, and the finish will be celebrated with the traditional beach
party. Late registration will begin on the beach at 6:45 A.M. and end at 8 A.M.
Entry fees are $20 for the half-marathon, $15 for the 5-K run and $7 for the
Family Fun Run. Until Wednesday, registration will cost $16, $12 and $5
respectively. Call 481-5933 for more information.

POTTERY WORKSHOP

Todd Piker, founder of Cornwall Bridge Pottery in Litchfield County, will
conduct a workshop at his studio on Saturday from 10 to 4, sponsored by the
Brookfield Craft Center of Brookfield.

Mr. Piker served his apprenticeship in 1970 with Michael Cardew, the celebrated
British potter, at Cardew's pottery in Wenford Bridge, Cornwall, England, and in
1975 Mr. Piker started his own pottery back in Cornwall, Connecticut.

He will lead students through the making of this distinctive wood-fired product,
from throwing to loading to glazing. Rounding out the day will be a film on
Cornwall Bridge pottery and other studios, and a home-cooked meal served on
ceramics made on the premises. The fee is $135. Call 775-4526 for reservations
or more information.

MOVIE SERIES

"Feast Your Eyes: A Season of Food and Passion in New Foreign Films" is the
title of the weekly summer series of movies at the Wadsworth Atheneum, 600 Main
Street, in downtown Hartford. Each film will be shown from Thursday through
Saturday at 7:30 and Sunday at 2, through Aug. 6. Admission will be $5.

The popular 1994 comedy from Taiwan, "Eat Drink Man Woman," gets the series
started this week, followed on July 6 through 9 by "Cafe au Lait" from France.
To be screened in subsequent weeks are "Like Water for Chocolate" from Mexico,
"The Scent of Green Papaya" from Vietnam," "The Wedding Banquet" from Taiwan and
"Strawberry and Chocolate" from Cuba.

On Sundays the Museum Cafe will be open for brunch from 11:30 to 2:30. For more
information, call 278-2670.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              299 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: June 18, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1453 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   8   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 2      4  149  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 3      3   3   THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.)
                Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and
                European officials.

 4      2   6   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and her private life.

 5      6  143  OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

 6      5  68   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 7     10   4   MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport
                pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.

 8      8   5   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 9      9  52   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 10     7   8   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 11    11   2   STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A
                collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and
                short stories.

 12         2   THIN AIR, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $21.95.) The private
                eye Spenser investigates the kidnapping of the young wife of a
                Boston cop.

 13    13  17   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 14    15   2   OF LOVE AND OTHER DEMONS, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez. (Knopf,
                $21.) The romance of a girl and a priest who is assigned to
                oversee her exorcism.

 15    12  11   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  36   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts
                to keep it from spreading.

 2      2   3   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician
                explains the ways in which the body heals itself.

 3     10   3   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist examines the strange ways of a species
                of males called "guys."

 4     16   2   KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend
                of O.J. Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole
                Simpson and Ron Goldman.

 5      4  67   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6      3   8   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 7      6  18   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 8      5  25   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 9      8  78   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 10     7   9   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 11         2   SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White.
                (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her
                adventures while traveling and at home.

 12    17  14   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive
                business strategies.

 13     9   5   PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist
                tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill
                daughter.

 14    12   7   MY LUCKY STARS, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                actress reminisces about her four decades in Hollywood.

 15    14  41   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  108  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      3  13   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 3      2  54   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 4          5   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 3, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

 COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that
turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which
spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents
or biological insults.

COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya, by Stephen Handelman. (Yale University,
$27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia as a lawless land at the
mercy of organized crime.

DEEP RIVER, by Shusaku Endo. (New Directions, $19.95.) Mr. Endo's novel follows
soulless modern Japanese travelers to the Ganges, where they encounter the
humanity and suffering of a few who have found faith.

THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg.
(Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a
wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct
under the old regimes.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

IN THE TIME OF THE AMERICANS: FDR, Truman, Eisenhower, Marshall, MacArthur --
The Generation That Changed America's Role in the World, by David Fromkin.
(Knopf, $30.) F.D.R. stars in a historian's incisive account of the men who made
the 20th century what it is.

THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

LYTTON STRACHEY: The New Biography, by Michael Holroyd. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $35.) A substantially reworked version of Mr. Holroyd's two-volume
biography of Strachey that appeared in the 1960's, this painstakingly researched
portrait contains new disclosures about the lives and loves of Strachey and his
Bloomsbury contemporaries.

MY USUAL GAME: Adventures in Golf, by David Owen. (Villard, $23.) Mr. Owen, a
journalist, had a handicap numbering in the dozens when he set out to devote
every waking moment to improving his golf game; he recounts his obsessive
odyssey in hilarious detail here.

RETHINKING AMERICA, by Hedrick Smith. (Random House, $25.) An examination of
America's economy and prescriptions for repairing it to accord with a changed
world order, by a journalist who does not fear big subjects.

THE ROMANTIC GENERATION, by Charles Rosen. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A
professor and pianist offers a fond, accessible analysis of the works of
Schumann, Mendelssohn, Chopin and others during the period from 1827 to 1849.
Mr. Rosen furnishes musical illustrations on the accompanying compact disk.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              300 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Welcome to New York, Capital of Profanities

BYLINE: By CAREY GOLDBERG

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1379 words


Consider the new T-shirt on sale near Pennsylvania Station, a souvenir for the
discerning tourist who wants to communicate with New York City natives in their
own tongue: "How to Use the F-Word." The T-shirt's four-letter Berlitz course
lists ways to insert that versatile word into everyday phrases like "Who are
you?" and "Pass the salt."

Consider the number of times that same word is uttered in "Do the Right Thing,"
the Spike Lee movie set in Brooklyn: 182, to describe everything from the heat
to a slice of pizza.

Consider what happened when Nellie, a cherubic toddler at the Purple Circle Day
Care Center in Manhattan, found that she had no soap to wash her dimpled little
hands: She asked for soap with such unprintable vehemence that the center
quickly convened a circle-talk on the theme, "When you're very angry, what can
you say?"

Linguists and experts on American dialects generally agree that New York, among
its many claims to excess, appears to be the most foul-mouthed city in the
nation, rivaling only prison and the armed forces in its penchant for profanity.
The evidence is only anecdotal, but from the floor of the New York Stock
Exchange to the schoolyards of the Bronx, the T-shirt word resounds so
frequently that many natives fail even to register it as a curse.

"Life in New York is so much trouble that we need some expletive to fill the
need," said Leonard R. N. Ashley, an English professor at Brooklyn College who
has studied the language of the city's underclass. "There's a kind of operatic
aspect about life in New York -- the plot is unbelievable and the characters are
exaggerated and the language has to rise to express this."

The city, boiling over with the stress of high-pressure jobs and too-tight
living, inspires profanity, linguists say. At the same time, its shrugging
tolerance for all kinds of behavior and the anonymity its residents feel provide
an atmosphere where expletives multiply unchecked.

"The anonymity allows you to curse without fear of retribution," said Timothy
Jay, author of "Cursing in America." "There are still parts of the country with
small communities and standard Christian values where people are intolerant of
it. You can go into restaurants in the South, in Ohio and in Massachusetts and
see signs saying, 'No profanity.' "

But in New York City, even if listeners are acquainted with foul talkers, they
tend not to object, said Prof. William Stewart, a sociolinguist at CUNY.

"There's a whole level of permission for swearing in the city," he said. "The
people who don't swear don't censure the people who do. There's a high level of
overtolerance in the city for a lot of things."

The bigger a city, the fouler its language, linguists say. But New Yorkers --
the constituents of a Mayor who likes the slogan "We can kick your city's ass"
-- add new dimensions to tough talk. Unsuspecting visitors are often shocked by
the language prescribed on the T-shirt despite previous exposure to dirty talk
from gangsta rappers and characters in film and fiction.

"I have never heard more people say it," said Suzanne Dieter, a senior at
Columbia University. "I was struck by it when I moved here from Baltimore. It
was always a very taboo word in Baltimore. I mean, it wasn't a taboo among
youth, but you never heard grown-ups use it."

New York's tolerance for gutter words represents an intensification of the
increasingly widespread use of profanity across America over the last generation
and its resulting loss of punch, linguistic experts say.

Even that ultimate four-letter expletive from the T-shirt has largely lost its
sexual meaning and much of its shock value, particularly for New Yorkers, said
Prof. Lewis Allen, author of "The City in Slang."

"It's become just an intensifier, you know, like shucks and golly and darn that
people used to say," he said. And its -ing form, he added, has become for many
simply a substitute for "very."

As a sign that the word has lost much of its effect, Professor Ashley pointed to
its disappearance in slum and bathroom-wall graffiti.

"It was supposed to shock people, but since it won't shock people anymore, it's
no use," he said. "So you put up, 'So-and-so loves somebody' again."

Profanity has become more commonplace all across America since the movie
industry got its rating system in the late 1960's and on-screen expletives in
films for adults began to multiply. They now average about 70 or 80 per film,
Mr. Jay said.

The Vietnam War and the class-leveling ideology of the 1960's brought speech
patterns formerly considered lower-class to the educated class, and the feminist
movement led to the spread of once-macho cussing among women, linguists say.
They also point to the increasingly casual style of American life. Professor
Ashley said some sneaker-wearing students reach college age never having owned a
pair of leather shoes.

Some relatively profanity-free bastions remain. Most newspapers and radio
stations -- with notable exceptions -- allow virtually none of what the Federal
Communications Commission considers the big seven swear words. But overall,
Americans across the board tend to be much freer with foul language than a
generation or two ago, and New Yorkers stand out as having some of the loosest
lips around.

One additional reason the city may bring out the expletive in people is the
high-pressure environment of its workplaces, be they in high finance, television
or super-competitive retail, linguists say.

Prof. Lewis Freeman, head of the speech program at Columbia University, recalled
observing an investment banker interview a job applicant and being struck by the
amount of hard-core profanity the banker used.

When he asked the interviewer about it afterward, Mr. Freeman said, "He answered
that in his section of the investment bank, there was a lot of profanity, and he
wanted to make sure it's somebody who's comfortable with that, instead of
stopping what she's doing and turning bright red."

It does start young. At the Purple Circle Day Care Center on West 100th Street,
director Mary Jane Lewis said, an upset mother recently reported that her
preschool child had turned a crude phrase at a bus stop when she asked where the
bus was.

With all the bandying about of expletives, linguists say, they have lost enough
of their oomph that the most offensive words in American society now are not the
old four-letter ones.

"The most taboo language today is ethnic slurs," Professor Allen said. "It used
to be sexual language, it used to be language that alluded to extreme forms of
violence, but today it's ethnic and gender slurs."

Those slurs, however, are not as universal as that famous word from the T-shirt,
leaving American English without its former king of curse words.

"It's possible that for a while we won't have the one big shocking word
anymore," said Miriam Eisenstein Ebsworth, a linguist at New York University.
"But language being what it is, we'll probably come up with something else if we
really have a desire to be nasty."

The next nasty word will have to stretch powerfully to equal the flexibility of
our current number one expletive, which is used as a noun, a verb and an
adjective.

The word's tremendous linguistic range might be best observed at the popular
basketball and handball courts on West Fourth Street, particularly on a day when
Robert Taylor is at the wall.

A contractor born in the South Bronx and now living in Queens, he plays
$200-a-game handball against some of the city's champions, peppering his speech
with expletives that seem rhythmically coordinated with the thwack of his ball.

In less than an hour of play recently, he cursed more than once a minute.
Relishing the simple force of the four-letter word howled by itself after a
particularly painful missed shot, Mr. Taylor also used the adjectival form to
describe the score, the game, the serve, his partner, his opponent's mouth, the
ball, and in combination with other expletives.

"Cursing is like a frustration release," said John Wright, better known as
Rookie, a top handball player. "If it wasn't cursing, it'd be something else.
It'd probably be violence."

Asked if he could ever play without swearing, Mr. Taylor used the expletive
before saying, "No! Never!"

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Taylor, playing handball in the Village and, like so
many other New Yorkers, cursing up a storm. (Chang W. Lee/The New York
Times)(pg. B3); Robert Taylor punctuates his handball game with expletives.
(Chang W. Lee/The New York Times)(pg. B1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              301 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Deficit Epiphany

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 13;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


To hear anguished liberals tell it, Rasputin has come to town to corrupt the
Czar's court. Or Svengali has just shown up at the White House to mesmerize
Trilby. Or Pere Joseph arrived to manipulate Cardinal Richelieu as his "gray
eminence."

The horrific shock after Bill Clinton made his latest right turn without
signaling led to a search for a hidden hand. The finding was summed up in
yesterday's Washington Post: "Republican Adviser Stages a Quiet White House
'Coup.' "

The goo-goo guru whose name is on all lib lips is Richard Morris, a political
consultant who helped Clinton in his first race for Arkansas governor, then
returned to help him stage a comeback after his first defeat.

Mr. Morris is being blamed, or credited, for the advice leading to Clinton's
Deficit Epiphany, in which the President -- who ran in 1992 as a "New Democrat"
centrist, and then lurched left -- threw off the advice of liberal staffers who
led the party down to defeat in 1994. By belatedly adopting a balanced budget as
his goal; by making his battle cry "yes, but" -- Clinton doublecrossed his
fellow doublecrossers.

Let us first examine the Morris bio and credentials. Born in New Rochelle, N.Y.,
47 years ago, he merited entrance into Manhattan's Stuyvesant High and then
Columbia University. As a member of the class of '68 (though graduated a year
early), he was molded in the anti-Vietnam War mindset: At 17, Morris went door
to door for Gene McCarthy in New Hampshire, denouncing the Democratic
establishment.

That experience led him into insurgent Democratic politics on the West Side. He
worked for the Citizens Budget Commission, writing reports reinventing the
government wheel, offering advice and speeches to local pols like Percy Sutton,
Stanley Steingut, Howard Samuels and Ed Koch.

I remember how you get started in the guru game: a little polling, some
position-papering, a dollop of much-needed speechwriting. Tony Schwartz, the
adman who nuked Barry Goldwater with the "daisy spot," was a Morris mentor.

As he grew up, he moved right. By 1977, when he was urging Bill Clinton to run
for governor, not senator, because it was an easier race, Morris was working on
Ed King's campaign against Michael Dukakis. He had a hand in Pete Wilson's '82
Senate race.

Since that time, he's consulted on 41 statewide races, 26 of them winners. Last
year, operating out of his home in West Reading, Conn., with no staff, he
advised Don Sundquist in Tennessee, Tom Ridge in Pennsylvania, Bill Weld in
Massachusetts, Trent Lott in Mississippi. All won.

If he's so good, and worked for so many pols, how come nobody ever heard of him?
For one thing, he sells inside advice and strategy, not front-line campaign
management, staying out of the line of fire. For another, he has what F.D.R.'s
Louis Brownlow called "a passion for anonymity." He writes no books, cultivates
no pundits. Not since Nixon's Cliff Miller has anyone brought that off.

All that will now change. Like a cash-cow company, Morris is in play. If he
hides, he will feed the Svengali image, making Clinton look like a voice without
a brain; but if Morris steps out front, he will be haunted by the centrist ghost
of David Gergen, and will soon be snicker-snacked by a jealous White House staff
caught zigging as the voters zagged. No sympathy offered; welcome to the N.F.L.

White House insiders who ideologize the '94 elections advised more of the same,
but Clinton sensed he wasn't Truman and that voters were more likely to reward
success than parse responsibility for failure.

Base, shmase. The President who told editors in April he preferred a stack of
laws to a pile of vetoes reached for the centrist speeches he knew Morris would
provide.

Staff chief Leon Panetta, having turned on a President in his youth, decided to
be a loyalist this time and organized the turnaround. Hillary still wears a
Cheshire Cat chagrin. Campaign Manager Harold Ickes can teach it round or flat.
Stephanopoulos will fight again another day.

So Clinton, running as a sort of Independent, makes nice to Newt and will ride
the Republican wave until it loses its force. And self-deluding liberals wail
"if the Czar only knew" and blame it on Rasputin.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              302 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
U.S. Finds No P.O.W.'s At Vietnam Military Site

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 218 words

DATELINE: TAM THANH, Vietnam, June 18


United States officials inspected a site today where a former Congressman said
American prisoners of war were held by Vietnam as recently as February, but said
they found nothing to support his contention.

The site that Bill Hendon, a former Republican Representative from North
Carolina, said contained an underground prison on a mountainside in a military
security zone about 50 miles northwest of Hanoi turned out to be a military
truck depot.

Mr. Hendon said this month that he had information that American prisoners were
held in a military security area near Hung Hoa village. He spent a week in Hanoi
trying to have his allegation investigated and was expelled by Vietnam.

The Vietnamese Government said there were no underground prisons in Vietnam. The
Vietnamese and American Governments agree that North Vietnam released all
American prisoners it was holding when it turned over 591 Americans in
"Operation Homecoming" in 1973.

Mr. Hendon's charge surfaced as President Clinton was under pressure from some
members of Congress to establish diplomatic relations with Hanoi.

The United States regards Vietnamese cooperation in accounting for more than
2,200 American servicemen still listed as missing in action in Indochina as a
condition for normal relations with Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              303 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

More Misery for Vietnamese Detainees

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 399 words


Only a few weeks ago, it looked as if the sad saga of the tens of thousands of
Vietnamese stuck in squalid detention camps across Southeast Asia was finally
heading toward a tolerable conclusion. Those who did not qualify as political
refugees were headed back, under U.N. monitoring, to a Vietnam that was, if no
paradise, at least less impoverished and repressive than the one they fled.

Then House Republicans attached an amendment to the foreign aid bill that calls
for reconsidering the asylum claims of those already found ineligible and
cutting off funding to monitor and assist returned refugees in Vietnam. This
clumsy political gesture touched off riots in the detention camps against any
further repatriations and halted the return flow.

Reinterviewing may sound like a generous offer, and many who voted for the
provision sincerely wanted to help the Vietnamese in detention camps. But the
more likely result is further suffering.

The amendment, which the Senate has not acted on and which President Clinton
opposes, may never become law. And it is not at all clear whether Congress can
compel the executive branch to grant political asylum to people who do not
qualify.

The story of the Vietnamese boat people began nearly 20 years ago, in the years
following Hanoi's triumph over South Vietnam. Millions of Vietnamese set sail in
small boats fleeing ethnic and political persecution and economic misery. Many
died at sea or fell victim to local pirates.

Those who made it to nearby shores were received with hostility and herded into
makeshift camps to await possible acceptance elsewhere. Eventually, more than a
million were admitted to the United States and tens of thousands were accepted
by other countries.

Some 40,000 remain in Southeast Asian camps, more than half in Hong Kong. All
have been formally found ineligible for asylum under international law, which
requires well-founded fear of persecution. Procedural questions have been raised
about a small number of screenings, and these might usefully be reviewed. But
the House's call for a wholesale reopening will only hold out false hopes and
prevent agreement to voluntary return. Meanwhile, cutting off monitoring and
assistance funds can only hurt those who have already returned.

The Senate, if it truly cares about the fate of these Vietnamese, should avoid
repeating the House's mistake.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              304 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                                  (new Jersey)

NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
Lautenberg to Visit Vietnam

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Senator Frank R. Lautenberg will accompany six other lawmakers on a fact-finding
mission to Vietnam. The Senator said that he hopes to learn more about the
benefits and drawbacks of normalizing relations between the United States and
Vietnam, but that he is primarily interested in progress on resolving the issue
of Americans still listed as missing in Vietnam.

"This is the linchpin in normalizing our relations with Vietnam," he said over
the weekend. The American delegation, which will travel to Vietnam over the
Fourth of July holiday, is scheduled to meet with Vietnamese officials.
Accompanying Mr. Lautenberg will be Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Dale Bumpers
of Arkansas, both Democrats, and four House members.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              305 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
The Mole Who Never Bothered to Wear a Mask

BYLINE: By JEFF STEIN;   Jeff Stein, a former agent handler for Army
intelligence, is the author of "A Murder in Wartime: The Untold Spy Story that
Changed the Course of the Vietnam War."

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 949 words



BETRAYAL
The Story of Aldrich Ames, an American Spy
By Tim Weiner, David Johnston and Neil A. Lewis
Illustrated. 308 pages. Random House. $25

This would be a sad story if it weren't so funny. Unfortunately for the Central
Intelligence Agency, though, this impressively reported tale of one of the most
serious security breaches in the annals of American espionage is terrifically
entertaining and, at times, even darkly hilarious. Try as they do to maintain an
appropriately judicious tone, the authors -- Tim Weiner, David Johnston and Neil
A. Lewis, Washington correspondents for The New York Times -- cannot avoid
telling a tale that often unfolds like " 'Our Man in Havana' meets 'Monty
Python.' "

When we meet our man Aldrich Hazen Ames in 1983, he is having a midlife crisis.
Divorced, broke and notoriously alcoholic, he is planning to marry a Colombian
woman whom he met while on a spying assignment in Mexico City (an assignment
that, like his others until then, was a waste of taxpayers' money). Then, a
stroke of fortune: Even though his record at the C.I.A. "was mostly a lamentable
chronicle of mediocrity," Mr. Ames is appointed counterintelligence chief of the
Soviet operations section at C.I.A. headquarters and given the dossier of every
Russian working secretly for American intelligence. As the world now knows, he
sold their names to Moscow. Ten were arrested and most executed, the authors
report.

One customarily expects C.I.A. officials to conform to the shopworn stereotype
of brilliant, hard-charging, Ivy-educated eccentrics wrapped in tweed and pipe
smoke, a la Allen Dulles or the fictions of John le Carre and Tom Clancy. Alas,
here is the espio-bureaucrat Aldrich Ames: "When he left his office to wander
the hallways of the fourth floor, he played the role of the office goof-off,
getting in everyone's way with his aimless chitchat. People came to dread his
time-killing visits." Not enough, apparently. Mr. Ames was still on the payroll
after years of debauchery and sloth. And he wasn't just playing the role, he was
a goof-off, falling asleep at his desk after liquor-soaked lunches with his
Soviet counterparts.

At first, it seems astounding that Mr. Ames's bosses permitted him to keep
meeting with Russians, since he had never managed to recruit one. Nor did they
take special notice when he stopped filing the required reports on these
meetings, some of which took place in the Soviet Embassy in downtown Washington.

F.B.I. cameras even videotaped Mr. Ames going into the Soviet Embassy. That
turned out to be useful later, but not when it would have stopped the fledgling
mole in his tracks.

Mr. Ames's treachery brings quick results. Moscow quickly hunts down the spies
he unmasks and rolls them up. Even then, though, when he is a most likely
culprit, C.I.A. security people fail to zero in on Mr. Ames. One mole-hunting
effort after another is botched or abandoned. At one tingling point in the
story, he is actually assigned to debrief a high-ranking Russian defector.
Meanwhile, he and his wife flout every rule of their trade by lavishly spending
their ill-gotten cash on a new house, new Jaguars, and piles of clothes and
jewelry -- all conspicuously beyond his $80,000 C.I.A. salary. He might as well
have pinned a blinking button to his lapel announcing, "Hi, I'm the Mole," but
would anybody have cared?

To be fair to the C.I.A., Moscow did its part to deflect suspicion from its
extravagantly careless associate. In one of the book's most riveting passages,
based on research made possible only by the end of the cold war, the Russians
pepper the C.I.A. with false leads through diplomatic and other channels,
thoroughly confounding the American counterspies.

As they lurch toward Mr. Ames in one darkly comic scene after another, C.I.A.
security officials finally top themselves by fretting over violating his privacy
rights; the same gang that hardly thinks twice about spying on Americans opposed
to its illegal wars in Central America hesitates to pry into the finances of a
suspected traitor on its own staff. Nor will the agency spring a surprise
inspection of his home and computer files (where Mr. Ames had cockily kept
copies of his correspondence with the Russians). At this point, one concludes
that the C.I.A. would rather sweep a mole under the rug than tell the F.B.I.
about it and suffer the embarrassment. But those days are gone. Tipped off by a
foreign source, the F.B.I barged in and, needless to say, will never be kept out
again.

"The inability of the C.I.A. to deal with a traitor in its midst was a part of
its cultural tradition of secrecy, arrogance, and denial," the authors write.
Mr. Ames, pontificating from jail, says much the same thing. But officials who
have interrogated him feel he is still holding something back. Some suspect
another mole is on the loose. After reading this book, I thought, anything seems
possible.

The C.I.A.'s own report on the affair blamed 23 officials by name, including the
three C.I.A. directors who served under Presidents Reagan and Bush. Reading it,
said President Clinton's former Director of Central Intelligence, James R.
Woolsey, "one could almost conclude not only that no one was watching, but that
no one cared."

From the look of things, little has changed since Mr. Ames was arrested. The
C.I.A. insists on using the same polygraph tests Mr. Ames easily passed; it
covers up the killing of Americans by Guatemalans on its payroll; it can't seem
to keep track of Serbian missiles in Bosnia. With control of $30 billion a year,
one wonders why. Long after Aldrich Ames was trundled off in leg irons, it
remains the heart of the matter.

NAME: Aldrich Ames

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Aldrich Ames (Reuters/Bettmann/Random House)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              306 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Gay Spirit in the Fight Against the Axis

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;   Page 24;   Column 4;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 513 words


"Coming Out Under Fire" is an account of the United States military's policy
toward homosexuals in World War II, as experienced by several of those who
suffered for being who they are.

Based on Alan Berube's book of the same title, this hourlong offering from the
Independent Television Service is a reminder of a time when psychiatrists viewed
homosexuals as mentally ill and the military viewed them as dangerous to morale,
not to mention morality.

So thousands of men and women, draftees and enlistees, found themselves forced
to conceal their sexual tastes or natures and to lie to avoid punishment. But
some found ways to express themselves. A marine tells of his pleasure in getting
up in drag and entertaining his buddies; and there he is, in a newsreel of a
camped-up camp show, making like a star. To judge by tonight's reminiscences,
despite the rules many found companionship and even romance on land and sea.

No evidence was ever presented that homosexuals as a group performed any less
bravely than heterosexuals. As demonstrated by the old training films that are
put to effective use here, the military brass was conforming more to the
assumptions and prejudices of the time than to the facts on the ground, and many
loyal young Americans paid for it. Several tell of winding up in mental wards or
in "queer stockades" as a result of "a homo hunt" before being kicked out of the
service. A woman, who had rejoiced in being a WAVE, says, "It broke my spirit."

The hour begins and ends with critical asides about the current Pentagon rule of
"Don't ask, don't tell." Given the record laid out tonight, that rule seems more
than ever like an evasion rather than a coherent policy, much less an equitable
one. Maybe it's the Joint Chiefs of Staff who need more courage, not to say
psychiatric attention.

'The Cronkite Report'
'The Drug Dilemma: War or Peace?'
The Discovery Channel, 10 P.M. and 1 A.M.

In this latest offering from "The Cronkite Report," Walter Cronkite compares
America's long-running war on drugs to the Vietnam War and proposes that it be
ended before it costs any more millions or billions. His preference is not
legalization but alternatives to punishment of the sort that he finds in the
courts of Brooklyn, the schools of Indiana and elsewhere. Their goal is to treat
and to educate.

"The Drug Dilemma" is persuasive, if not particularly pioneering, in its
criticism of mandatory sentencing rules, which have jammed prisons with
nonviolent minor players in the drug game. As for the alternatives, they sound
attractive, but Mr. Cronkite doesn't go all that deeply into them. The hour ends
with his call for a "bipartisan blue-ribbon panel" to come up with a
comprehensive drug policy, an all-purpose favorite of editorial writers in
search of some sort of punch line.

COMING OUT UNDER FIRE
Channel 13, tonight at 9

Produced and directed by Arthur Dong; written by Mr. Dong and Alan Berube;
edited by Veronica Selver; music by Mark Adler; Stephen Lighthill, director of
photography; Salome Jens, narrator.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              307 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK;
Manhattan Project Set to Music

BYLINE: By BERNARD HOLLAND

SECTION: Section C;   Page 15;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS, June 19


The woman in "The Woman at Otowi Crossing" -- Stephen Paulus's new piece for the
Opera Theater of Saint Louis -- serves as a fulcrum. On it the newly invented
atomic bomb and the mystical powers of New Mexico's Pueblo people teeter back
and forth. At Helen Chalmers's tearoom in the desert, Manhattan Project
scientists dine and agonize. Around them, the magic of the countryside is in
operation.

What a loaded subject. The ambition of Messiaen or the wildness of Scriabin
might have provided it suitable scale. Mr. Paulus is more a domesticator. So is
Joan Vail Thorne, whose adaptation of a Frank Waters novel based on fact reduces
big ideas to little ones and adds homey ornament to bare circumstance. What was
apparently a lonely yet exultant life now roils with fictional family conflict:
ambivalence over an insistent suitor, a visit by a disaffected daughter. The
cosmic has been shrunk to parlor size. What's a mother to do? becomes as
critical a question as human survival.

Mr. Paulus is a modest man, and his operas do not venture far. Here he is at his
best when nature and magic occupy the stage. The orchestral vocabulary --
borrowed and of a certain age -- is still tone painting that works. There are
the flurries of harp, flute and horns. Strings play gentle ostinatos, tremolos
and wavy, measured trills.

The other side of this story lapses into melodrama: domestic wrangling, the atom
blast itself, importuning F.B.I. agents and neighbors, the salvation of a young
Pueblo Indian gone to seed and drink. All serve to send Act II dangerously near
to caricature. Some of the medium's most dangerous enemies were lurking here,
the creative people who believe that one has only to invoke the term "opera" in
order to justify emotive excess or semaphoric gesticulation.

Andrew Wentzel, a promising bass-baritone, was excellent as Tilano on Saturday
night. Sheri Greenawald projected the title role with admirable concentration,
though also with an anguish so relentless that few traces of serenity or
happiness showed through. (So much for the spiritual healing powers of the
desert.) Colin Graham directed. Derek McLane's simple set was framed by red rock
formations and centered on a bending tree. Richard Buckley conducted a graceful
performance.

Putting Haydn's "Armida" in this season's repertory was an admirable deed. I
doubt, however, that the company will do it again. Born in the age of Bach and
living well past Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, Haydn was a kind of glue between
cultures. "Armida," written in 1784, carries an older opera seria style into a
different, more fluid operatic age. Drama progresses in installments, musical
numbers jump from point to point rather than glide between them. "Armida" sits
there, not quite sure how to generate motion. Mozart had solved the problem
three years earlier with "Idomeneo." Haydn couldn't.

He was a busy opera composer but not a true one. The best opera music is always
in the thrall of people and activity. Haydn's scenes resemble movements, the
completeness of the musical idea taking precedence. "Armida" is a close cousin
to Dvorak's "Rusalka," a piece similarly filled with ravishing music by a great
symphonist. Here two wonderful musical engines sit at idle.

Neil Peter Jampolis's set is an archeological trash dump: rubble, disorder,
distressed tapestry, seedy columns, propped-up walls. They probably comment on
Saracen corruption, but subliminally attack the opera itself. With a sorceress
in the title role, the magical transformations cry out for the kind of virtuoso
staging coups that the Loretto-Hilton Center's curtainless, projected stage
can't manage. Something beyond reverence might keep "Armida" fresh: Rinaldo in a
spaceship, perhaps; Peter Sellars's transposition to Vietnam.

Everything played in this house is in English. The virtues are obvious for a
950-seat space, but lines like "Dark threatening clouds are gathering all around
us; trembling and terror have seized my troubled breast" argued compellingly for
incomprehensibility. Haydn wrote brilliantly for the voice, and on Friday night,
Christine Brewer's big, agile soprano devoured the title role. Under Daniel
Beckwith, Haydn's pictorial writing suffered indifference in the pit. Yet Act
III's violent chord progressions, Rinaldo's big aria that ensues, and the
splendid ensemble finale linger in the memory.

"La Belle Helene" on Sunday found itself set in Offenbach's own time, but then
it is more about Napoleon III than about Homeric heroes. Pamela Dillard carried
the role of Helen with amused high style. Gordon Gietz, an excellent young
tenor, was Paris. Geoffrey Dunn's wisecracking translation shows the right
self-control. Yves Abel's conducting was the best of the weekend.

"Tosca" popped up at the Saturday matinee with Pamela South as the
tough-sounding heroine and Gerard Dolter as a Scarpia trafficking in
silent-movie villainy. As Cavaradossi, Donald Braswell is fit and healthy but
balloons vowels like Dean Martin in his prime.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pamela Dillard and Gordon Gietz in a scene from "La Belle
Helene." (Ken Howard/Opera Theater of St. Louis)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              308 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
President of Vietnam To Visit U.N. in October

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;   Page 10;   Column 6;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 19


President Le Duc Anh is to visit the United Nations headquarters in New York in
October, becoming the most senior Vietnamese official to visit the United States
since the Vietnam War ended in 1975, the Government said today.

Mr. Anh is to attend 50th-anniversary ceremonies of the United Nations.

American officials said it was too early to say whether Mr. Anh would also go to
Washington. The United States and Vietnam do not yet have full diplomatic
relations.

President Clinton said last week that he was considering a recommendation by
Secretary of State Warren Christopher that Washington establish full relations.

He said he would make a decision after analysis of documents on American
servicemen listed as missing in action in Indochina that Vietnam gave to an
American delegation last month.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              309 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Rush to Repatriate Vietnam Refugees

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


To the Editor:

"More Misery for Vietnamese Detainees" (editorial, June 19) correctly states
that what we ought to look for is a "tolerable conclusion" to the painful story
of the Vietnamese refugees.

As a former Foreign Service officer who served in Vietnam during the war and in
Southeast Asia during the years of the boat people's exodus, I understand why it
is that you, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the host
nations, the Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Department of State
all want to take the most direct route toward getting rid of the problem and
send all the refugees back to Vietnam, by force if necessary.

But as anyone familiar with how the U.N. High Commissioner has conducted the
screening in the camps over the last six years will tell you, there is a
fundamental flaw in that approach.

Here I am not referring to the hostility of the host nations toward the boat
people, to the low-level corruption found in camp administration or even to the
increasingly hard-hearted attitude of United States Government officials
responsible for refugee matters, but to the dubious quality of the screening
interviews in the camps, on which the U.N. officials based their ruling on the
future of individual asylum-seekers.

Long ago fairness and objectivity were replaced by sloppiness and
superficiality, and the screening process degenerated.

The result is that among the refugees there are probably several thousand whose
claims for asylum are legitimate. These include not only many Vietnamese who are
active anti-Communists but a large number who worked for the United States in
Vietnam, either for the military or the sizable civilian component, and who
would be at risk if they returned to Vietnam.

Thus it might be bureaucratically convenient simply to send all remaining
refugees back to Vietnam, but it would be unfair to a large number of them. They
deserve a hearing.

JAMES H. MCNAUGHTON
Bethesda, Md., June 19, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              310 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Don't Rush to Repatriate Vietnam Refugees;
Europeans in Limbo

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


To the Editor:

Your June 14 news article on unauthorized migration across various Central and
Eastern European countries reports a classic dilemma confronted by the
authorities of these opening societies on how to manage migration control and at
the same time provide protection to genuine refugees in flight from persecution.

For some years policy makers have feared a vast movement of people from east to
west after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. But this westward mass
migration has not materialized. Instead, various restrictive measures have begun
to creep eastward, largely through the device of bilateral re-admission treaties
in which countries in the Western parts of Europe offer resources to those to
the East to implement various control measures, including guarantees to receive
back those who sojourn through their territories.

Such arrangements span the territory from Bonn to Kiev and often result in the
imposition of status determination responsibilities on fragile or even
nonexistent adjudication systems. As a consequence, many genuine refugees become
ensnared in an indefinite limbo without status or prospects for a solution to
their needs for new homelands.

Strategies to contain the movement of asylum seekers are increasingly evident
around the world. The ways in which the international community manages such
movement will fundamentally affect the quality of refugee protection in Europe
and elsewhere.

ARTHUR C. HELTON
Director of Migration Programs
Open Society Institute
New York, June 16, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              311 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Battle's Ex-Foes Meet on Okinawa

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: MABUNI, Okinawa, June 23


He was a strapping 17-year-old farm boy from Michigan, she was an Okinawan
schoolgirl just a bit younger, and if they had met, they might have killed each
other -- or, a little later, married.

But others did the killing for them, and today Robert C. Fawley and Utako Ogidoh
met as names engraved on the same vast tombstone, two of the more than 200,000
people who died in the battle of Okinawa.

The Japanese made terrible winners in war, brutally ruling Korea, Singapore and
other countries that they defeated. But it would be difficult to find more
gracious losers than those who marked the 50th anniversary today of the last
great campaign of World War II.

The black granite monument unveiled today is engraved with not only the names of
the Japanese who were killed, but also those of the Americans who died seizing
the island of Okinawa, south of Japan. It is as if the Vietnam Memorial in
Washington bore not only the names of the Americans who died, but also those of
the Vietnamese.

John Foley, a retired New York City policeman, came to Okinawa partly to look
for the name of his best buddy, Mr. Fawley, the Michigan farm boy. "I think of
him every day of my life," Mr. Foley said. "He was like my brother."

Mr. Fawley was a machine-gunner, and he stood up during a vicious firefight to
rake the enemy positions. They got him instead.

"I'll never forgive them," Mr. Foley said of the soldiers he still calls "the
Japs." "I'll say 'hi' to them, but I won't shake their hands."

Miss Ogidoh died when an American shell hit the cave in which she was hiding,
sending shrapnel into her stomach. "Don't worry about me -- go help the others,"
she told her school friends. "I've seen people with stomach wounds. They never
survive."

She soon died.

"We should learn from this history," Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama said today
as he unveiled the peace monument. "We should pass this legacy on to future
generations, and we must renew our vow to achieve world peace."

Max Clayton, a retired history teacher from Atlanta, choked as he carefully used
a pencil to make a rubbing of the name of his pal, Carl T. Redmon, an
18-year-old from Arkansas. "We were digging our foxholes, and a sniper shot rang
out, and he gave that awful sound," Mr. Clayton said, his voice breaking. "I'm
going to take this rubbing and give it to his family."

Like most of the Americans interviewed -- and all of the Japanese -- Mr. Clayton
said he bore no hard feelings.

"They were fighting for a cause they believed in, just as we were," said James
S. Rigas, a former marine from Tucson, Ariz. Mr. Rigas was searching for the
name of Joseph Martinez, a 19-year-old fellow machine-gunner.

"He saved my life," Mr. Rigas said. "We were firing at the enemy, and he flopped
down beside me, and then suddenly he was shot all over and fell on top of me."

Mr. Martinez stopped bullets that would have otherwise killed Mr. Rigas, who was
also hit but recovered after three months in a hospital. Mr. Rigas says he no
longer hates the Japanese, and he himself ponders things that he did that he
regrets.

"One night, we felt someone coming through our lines, so we thought that it was
the enemy, and I started firing," Mr. Rigas recalled. "In the morning I saw that
it was women -- a group of women -- who were trying to get through. That has
always bothered me."

Most books list 12,000 Americans as killed in the battle of Okinawa, from April
through June 1945. But the Okinawan officials who planned the monument consulted
with veterans' groups and the Defense Department and came up with the names of
14,005 Americans who died, and whose names are engraved on the wall. An American
official said that figure was probably more accurate.

In contrast, some 200,000 Japanese died in the battle. Most were Okinawan
civilians -- including huge numbers of women and children -- who were killed
when American forces bombed and shelled the island. In addition, many civilians
hid in caves and refused to come out, so the Americans used flame throwers to
burn them out or explosives to seal them alive inside the ground.

The monument lists the names of 234,183 war dead, but it includes Okinawans who
were killed in the Japanese Army in other battles. It also lists Koreans and
Taiwanese, most of them forced laborers brought here by the Japanese, who died
on Okinawa. The different nationalities are on separate panels.

"This is my Dad," said Mihono Saihara, 62, pointing to the name Yoshio Saki on
the wall. Mr. Saki, a Navy man, apparently committed suicide in a cave as the
Americans closed in, but his body was never recovered.

"At the time I hated Americans," Mrs. Saihara said, as tears rolled down her
cheek. "But now there's peace, and I don't feel that hatred anymore.

"But as for war, I hate it. Seeing Mom's suffering, as she raised three kids
alone, I hate war. I hate war so much."

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Veterans of the American invasion of Okinawa and relatives of
those killed there gathered yesterday at the unveiling of a monument bearing the
names of more than 200,000, from both sides, killed in the battle. (Reuters)

Map of Okinawa showing location of Mabuni.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              312 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Trying to Save Elephants

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 23


Vietnam's last 300 elephants will die off unless authorities combat poachers and
loggers, international wildlife experts warned today.

Vietnam should also add about 250,000 acres to two elephant habitats, according
to Shanthini Dawson, a wildlife biologist with the World Wide Fund for Nature.
She spoke at a conference here on protecting Vietnam's elephants.

Vietnam had 2,000 elephants 15 years ago, according to the Forestry Ministry.
But farmers and loggers have encroached on remote wilderness and poachers kill
males for their tusks, a lucrative export.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              313 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bikers Without Helmets Cost Us Big Money;
Not Jefferson's Idea

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 362 words


To the Editor:

Dick Teresi, in "The Case for No Helmets" (Op-Ed, June 17), significantly
understates his case. Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 218, the various
state helmet laws it compels and the ways these laws are enforced epitomize the
petty tyranny that has begun to result in various manifestations of peaceful and
violent revolt in this country.

Imagine you are 49 years old. Imagine that when you were drafted into the Army
out of college in 1968 you went to Vietnam, even though it was not your smartest
career move. Imagine that you value what your father and grandfather taught you
to value: God, country, family, self-sufficiency, independence of thought and
action, and distrust of authority.

Imagine you have got to the point in your life where you feel confident to dress
yourself in the morning as you please, let your hair grow into a ponytail and
let your mustache curl like handlebars. Your life has been eventful enough that
you have a couple of scars and a couple of tattoos.

Imagine you have the $20,000 and the nerve and skill to ride a 1340-cc,
high-performance American motorcycle. Imagine the number of times a week you are
likely to be stopped and cited, ostensibly because you have the audacity to
choose to wear a one-pound "outlaw" helmet rather than the four-pound Department
of Transportation-approved variety.

How would you feel? Do you think there is too much government? Do you really
think this is what Thomas Jefferson had in mind?

I think helmets are much more likely to cause catastrophic neck injuries at
speeds above 13.66 miles per hour (the Transportation Department standard) than
they are likely to prevent head injuries below that speed. I don't insist that
everyone agree with me. I do think I have an inalienable right to make that
decision for myself. The power to decide whether I should wear a hard hat when I
ride and what sort of hat that will be should reside with me.

It does not matter who else believes what I should wear on my head. It is my
head, and in this country the power to decide what does or does not go on it
should be mine.

DON DAVIS
Redondo Beach, Calif., June 20, 1995

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              314 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: June 25, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  150  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $17.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 2      1   9   THE RAINMAKER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $25.95.) A young
                man barely out of law school tries to expose a corporation's
                multibillion-dollar scam.

 3      3   4   THE APOCALYPSE WATCH, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $24.95.)
                Tracking a neo-Nazi movement with designs on American and
                European officials.

 4      5  144  OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.)
                The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and
                pictures.

 5      4   7   LET ME CALL YOU SWEETHEART, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &
                Schuster, $24.) An unusual murder case haunts a prosecutor's
                career and her private life.

 6      6  69   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 7      8   6   ONCE UPON A MORE ENLIGHTENED TIME, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $9.95.) Eight "politically correct bedtime
                stories."

 8      9  53   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 9     10   9   LADDER OF YEARS, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $24.) At 40, a woman
                leaves her physician husband and children to start a new life
                in a strange town.

 10*    7   5   MIND PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $23.95.) Lucas Davenport
                pursues the kidnapper of a psychiatrist and her two daughters.

 11    11   3   STRANGE HIGHWAYS, by Dean Koontz. (Tartikoff/Warner, $23.95.) A
                collection of suspense tales, including novels, novellas and
                short stories.

 12         1   MYSTIQUE, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $21.95.) A medieval English
                warrior, on a search for a crystal that will make him the
                master of new lands, finds love.

 13    15  12   MOO, by Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $24.) Intrigues and machinations
                on the campus of a Midwestern state university.

 14    13  18   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 15    12   3   THIN AIR, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $21.95.) The private
                eye Spenser investigates the kidnapping of the young wife of a
                Boston cop.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  37   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of the deadly Ebola virus in Virginia and the efforts
                to keep it from spreading.

 2      8  26   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 3      3   4   DAVE BARRY'S COMPLETE GUIDE TO GUYS, by Dave Barry. (Random
                House, $21.) A humorist explains the strange ways of a species
                of males called "guys."

 4      2   4   SPONTANEOUS HEALING, by Andrew Weil. (Knopf, $23.) A physician
                explains the ways in which the body heals itself.

 5      5  68   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6      7  19   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 7      6   9   IN RETROSPECT, by Robert S. McNamara with Brian VanDeMark.
                (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) The author recalls his role
                in the Vietnam War.

 8      9  79   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 9      4   3   KATO KAELIN, by Marc Eliot. (Harper Paperbacks, $20.) A friend
                of O.J. Simpson's on events surrounding the murders of Nicole
                Simpson and Ron Goldman.

 10         1   NEW PASSAGES, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $25.) How changing
                social conditions and longer life expectancies are affecting
                our lives.

 11         1   A GOOD WALK SPOILED, by John Feinstein. (Little, Brown,
                $23.95.) A sportswriter reports on the P.G.A. Tour in 1993 and
                1994.

 12*   10  10   FROM BEGINNING TO END, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $20.) The
                rituals we practice and the spiritual journeys we take, from
                childhood to old age.

 13    13   6   PAULA, by Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $24.) The novelist
                tells stories of her family's life as she tends her fatally ill
                daughter.

 14    11   3   SLEEPING AT THE STARLITE MOTEL, by Bailey White.
                (Addison-Wesley, $20.) A Georgia schoolteacher tells about her
                adventures while traveling and at home.

 15    15  42   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  109  MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      2  14   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."

 3      3  55   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 4      4   6   HOW TO ARGUE AND WIN EVERY TIME, by Gerry Spence. (St.
                Martin's, $22.95.) A lawyer describes ways to win arguments at
                home and at work.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 10, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

AND WHEN DID YOU LAST SEE YOUR FATHER? by Blake Morrison. (Picador USA, $21.) An
English poet's perfectly persuasive memoir of his father, a man both overbearing
and engagingly quirky, whose death comes to the reader as a surprise.

THE BEAUTY OF THE BEASTLY: New Views on the Nature of Life, by Natalie Angier.
(Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) Essays and excursions by a New York
Times science reporter who deals gracefully with current ideas about the
innerest workings of us organisms.

COLD SNAP: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A collection that
turns a merciless, ironic gaze on the organic trap called life, in which
spiritual beings -- humans -- are forever in jeopardy of mere chemical accidents
or biological insults.

COMRADE CRIMINAL: Russia's New Mafiya, by Stephen Handelman. (Yale University,
$27.50.) A reporter's account of post-cold-war Russia as a lawless land at the
mercy of organized crime.

EMBLEMS OF MIND: The Inner Life of Music and Mathematics, by Edward Rothstein.
(Times Books/Random House, $25.) Sure they are alike, as everybody knows;
however, they are totally different! A New York Times critic schooled in both
explores paradoxes as old as Pythagoras.

THE HAUNTED LAND: Facing Europe's Ghosts After Communism, by Tina Rosenberg.
(Random House, $25.) A moral, political and psychological investigation, by a
wise journalist, of four post-Soviet societies struggling with their conduct
under the old regimes.

INDEPENDENCE DAY, by Richard Ford. (Knopf, $24.) Frank Bascombe, angst-ridden
hero of Mr. Ford's 1986 novel, "The Sportswriter," approaches middle age with an
unmanageable son, an unrepentant ex-wife and a sense of the "observance of human
possibility," which doesn't, he fears, apply to him.

THE INFORMATION, by Martin Amis. (Harmony, $24.) Mr. Amis's cool and brilliant
novel is sustained throughout by the corroding, corrupting envy of an
unsuccessful novelist for a successful novelist who is also his best friend.

THE LOVE LETTER, by Cathleen Schine. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Helen is 42,
capable and loves Edith Wharton. Johnny is 20, acne-spotted and -- like,
excellent! -- a big Tom Robbins fan. In this comic novel they fall in love.

LYTTON STRACHEY: The New Biography, by Michael Holroyd. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $35.) A substantially reworked version of Mr. Holroyd's two-volume
biography of Strachey, which appeared in the 1960's, this painstakingly
researched portrait contains new disclosures about the lives and loves of
Strachey and his Bloomsbury contemporaries.

THE PRICE OF A CHILD, by Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $23.) A sensual, funny first novel
that transposes to pre-Civil War Philadelphia the theme of the author's 1991
memoir, "Black Ice": the duty of an escapee toward the oppressed she leaves
behind.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              315 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

When We Were Racing With the Moon

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD;      John Noble Wilford, who won a Pulitzer Prize
in 1984 for his reporting on space, is a senior science writer for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 2;     Page 1;     Column 1;     Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2353 words


OF THE NINE APOLLO VOYAGES TO THE Moon a quarter of a century ago, only
threestand out in my memory. The others that I reported on achieved their goals
with impressive regularity, but the memorable three stirred especially deep
emotions.

Apollo 8 came as a refreshing surprise to a beleaguered nation at the end of
1968, a year of assassinations, burning streets and inflamed political passions.
This was the first time men had gone so far out in space, and the destination
was visible to all. Astronauts circled the Moon 10 times, each time disappearing
from radio contact. It was a mission that held the world -- and us reporters at
Mission Control in Houston -- in thrall. For me the story had everything:
science fiction coming to life, complete with hardware; man's lofty aspirations;
nasty global politics, and a race with a feared adversary.

Out their windows the astronauts could see the achingly beautiful Earthrise over
lifeless lunar plains, and on Christmas Eve the three men took turns reading the
opening verses from Genesis. It was like a gift of hope: there was still beauty
to behold, still an aspiration to goodness.

Apollo 11 made history. On July 20, 1969, two astronauts became the first humans
to walk in the dust of another world. A bold commitment had been fulfilled. The
Moon, that shining symbol of all things unattainable, had been reached. Was
there any limit to human potential?

Then, in April 1970, came Apollo 13, unlucky 13, a mission that failed and yet
for 3 days and 15 hours succeeded in holding the world in the grip of suspense.
We reporters saw it as a drama of epic dimensions worthy of a Homer. Three
astronauts went forth on a daring quest, met with disaster, faced death and
barely limped back to the safety of home.

Real-life dramas like that do not happen every day. So the story of Apollo 13,
more than any of the others, is likely to be told and retold many times in many
ways, and the retelling has begun. The story will be new to young Americans, and
even olders ones often have a hard time remembering. Last year the mission
commander, James A. Lovell, gave his account in the book "Lost Moon," written
with Jeffrey Kluger. Now comes the movie by the director Ron Howard with Tom
Hanks in the role of Jim Lovell. The movie, titled simply "Apollo 13," harks
back to the tragedy of the fire in the cockpit of Apollo 1 and the triumph of
Apollo 11 landing on the Moon. But mostly the film, which opens on Friday,
chronicles the flight of three men who would have landed on the Moon but for
their now-well-advertised "problem."

Whether or not "Apollo 13" succeeds with critics is a separate matter. But as a
reporter who covered the ill-starred flight, I can attest to the film's
authenticity. It is one continuous flashback to the time when Americans had put
so much energy and and so many resources into flying to the Moon, but were
already beginning to tire of the adventure. The
script is faithful to the actual story, even to the high-tech jargon we
reporters fell into using in everyday conversations. The effect of floating in a
zero-gravity environment for scenes set in space was created well by having the
actors photographed flying in a KC-135 jet, the space agency's "vomit comet"
that makes deep plunges to produce long moments of weightlessness for training
real astronauts. David Scott, the astronaut who commanded Apollo 15, served as a
consultant during the shooting, often advising the actors on fine points of how
astronauts talk or would operate cockpit controls.

The sets are believable replicas of astronaut training facilities, an
astronaut's suburban home in 1970 and the rows of consoles in Mission Control,
presided over by the stern flight director Gene Kranz (played by Ed Harris) in
his trademark resplendent vests.

The ambiance is just right, down to the Houston parties, the smoke-clouded
intensity of engineering meetings, the astronauts in their casual Ban-Lon shirts
and flight controllers with their short haircuts, narrow ties and shirt pockets
lined with plastic pen holders.

"Apollo 13" looks as if the movie makers at Universal Pictures went to great
pains to emphasize that this was an earlier time, and of course it was. Mission
Control was a man's province, and the few women who reported on the Apollo
missions were almost invariably there to cover the wives, a situation the film
acknowledges. Universal also adhered to a decision not to use any NASA
documentary film. The reasons were no doubt technical and esthetic; they wanted
to produce a film of seamless quality. But one effect is to make the point that
this is a later generation's take on an earlier generation's history.

Therein lies a telling irony concerning a triumph of virtual reality over real
reality. Today, with clever computer graphics and other technological
smoke-and-mirrors, we can create the verisimilitude of a flight to the Moon, but
no longer do we have the means or will for the real thing.

AS THE MOVIE MAKES clear, public interest in lunar flight was flagging by the
time of Apollo 13. The protracted war in Vietnam shoved Apollo to the periphery
of the national mind. The self-assurance that committed the nation to Apollo in
1961 was giving way to self-doubt. The goal of beating the Russians to the Moon
had been achieved, so it was hard to get excited about repetitions.

A much smaller crowd showed up for the Apollo 13 launching than for previous
Moon shots. On the evening of April 13, 1970 -- yes, the 13th -- the television
networks did not even bother to interrupt prime-time programming for the
astronauts' telecast from the lunar-bound spacecraft. We reporters at Mission
Control were eager for the telecast to end so we could file inserts to our
stories and repair to a spaghetti dinner being cooked for us down the road. Even
we felt the need for diversion from what was so far an uneventful flight too
much like the previous ones.

It was a shared feeling. Over the radio a little earlier, the capsule
communicator in Mission Control had quipped to the astronauts, "We're bored to
tears down here."

At the time, Apollo 13 was two days and 200,000 miles out from Earth and less
than a day away from the Moon, where Mr. Lovell and the lunar module pilot, Fred
Haise (Bill Paxton in the movie), planned to land on the Fra Mauro highlands.
The third man in the crew, Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon), would remain in the
command module in lunar orbit.

Mr. Swigert was a last-minute addition to the crew, replacing Thomas Mattingly
(Gary Sinise), who was scratched because he had been exposed to measles. In the
movie much is made of the pressure on the rookie to perform well -- perhaps too
much, in the opinion of some real space people I talked to.

Only Mr. Lovell had flown in space before. On his previous mission, the
Moon-orbiting Apollo 8, he could only look at the lunar landscape from 69 miles
above it. Now, in his first mission in command, he had the chance to cap his
career with a walk on the Moon. He was fervently counting on it.

Then disaster struck. A few minutes after their telecast ended, the crew heard a
loud, dull bang. Warning lights glowed red in the cockpit. According to Mr.
Lovell's book, Mr. Swigert radioed, "Hey, we've got a problem here"; a moment
later Mr. Lovell took the mike and said, "Houston, we've had a problem." (The
film renders Mr. Lovell's line as "Houston, we have a problem.")

Whatever the words, the voices were level but firm. Everyone knew that
astronauts never used the word "problem" for trivial matters. So in Mission
Control, all eyes were now fixed on the consoles, searching the data for clues
to what could have happened. We reporters were kept in a newsroom in a separate
building near Mission Control, but we were monitoring all communications with
the spacecraft. Those of us leaving for the spaghetti dinner stopped in our
tracks, waiting and listening. We never did eat dinner that evening.

Mr. Lovell told Mission Control, "We've had a main B bus undervolt." Something
dire was happening to the spacecraft's electric current.

One of the two oxygen tanks in Apollo's rear service module had exploded. Soon
the magnitude of the crisis became clear. The tanks supplied super-cold liquid
oxygen to the fuel cells that produced electricity for all of the command
module's systems and, as a byproduct, the crew's drinking water. The exploded
tank was empty, and the other one was venting fast. The escaping gases caused
the spacecraft to rock and tumble.

No longer could there be any thought of a lunar landing, and the crew knew it.
They could only wonder if they had any chance of ever getting back to Earth.

The movie gives a restrained but apparently accurate picture of how the
astronauts react to the emergency, respond to directions from flight controllers
and face their gloomy prospects. But most of the action has now shifted to the
ground, where wives and families wait, and flight controllers, engineers and
NASA officials weigh various possibilities for getting the astronauts back to
their suburban tract homes.

The movie captures their concern and their frantic ingenuity in suggesting the
repair of the craft -- using such mundane objects as duct tape and the cover of
the astronauts' flight plan. In this, the movie can be seen as a celebration of
the old American can-do spirit, something seldom invoked these days and almost
never celebrated.

In the hours after the explosion, flight controllers settled on a plan. They
decided against firing the command module's rocket to make a quick U-turn and
come back. Too dangerous. The rocket was housed in the service module, and the
film shows us that the crew could not see how much damage the explosion had
caused back there. No one could be sure that the rocket was still functional and
on ignition would not blow up the spacecraft. Instead, it was decided to use the
lunar module, attached to the front of the command module, as a lifeboat. The
lunar module had its own oxygen and electric power -- not much, but possibly
just enough, if carefully rationed.

The plan thus was for the astronauts to crowd into the lunar module, built for
two, and turn off the lights and heaters and continue to the Moon. Then they
would loop the Moon and fire the lunar module's rocket, designed for a Moon
landing, to put them on an Earthward trajectory. If there was a misfiring, the
astronauts might miss Earth and be doomed. With so little oxygen, they would not
have lived long.

I tried not to think of how I would write such an ending -- partly to avoid
jinxing their flight, partly to reject the possibility that all that work, all
those hopes, had gone so badly wrong.

But if their course was true, the astronauts, on approaching Earth, would be
able to return to their crippled command module and jettison the lunar module.
Then they could hope that they had enough battery power and reserve oxygen to
make it to a splashdown in the Pacific Ocean.

The outlines of the plan were announced about midnight by grim-faced NASA
officials. They insisted that the chances of a safe return were excellent. But
as I remember that night, their faces and the tone of their voices were not
reassuring. I had the fear that the officials might be holding back some awful
truth. In the new story I filed for the late editions of The Times, I wrote,
"There will be great risks and little margin for error or delay."

It is, of course, giving nothing away to tell what happened to the men of Apollo
13. The movie dramatizes the three anxious days of waiting, of dwindling oxygen
supplies, of the do-or-die rocket firing. The bone-weary astronauts nearly froze
in the 38-degree temperature of their powered-down lifeboat. Mr. Haise was sick,
and tempers flared, but they made it. (Perhaps fittingly, Mr. Lovell has a cameo
role as the Navy captain -- his own rank -- who welcomes the Apollo 13 survivors
aboard the recovery ship.)

In an article about the mission and the movie in the current issue of Air and
Space magazine, Mr. Lovell is quoted as saying that for a long time the space
agency sought to play down the experiece of Apollo 13 as a failure better
forgotten. "NASA wanted to get away from Apollo 13, get it behind them," he
said. "They thought it might hurt funding for the later Apollo missions."

The space agency was right to be worried. Its budgets would never again match
those of the late 1960's. But the responsibility does not lie with the Apollo
13's troubles. If anything, the brush with death put a more human face on space
flight and made it seem more exciting, more like the stuff of science fiction.
Technological perfection can be humdrum; failure in a worthy endeavor can be
appealing and revealing.

Now, with Mr. Lovell's book and especially the movie "Apollo 13," the epic
adventure has been restored to the national consciousness. Not that the movie
makers necessarily had this in mind. It will be revealing to see how the movie
resonates with younger people, which could determine if the story of Apollo 13
will have an enduring place in the culture.

ONE CAN IMAGINE THAT the story of Apollo 13, perhaps now or in other retellings
by generations to come, will evoke a time when people took risks to reach grand
goals, a time when the astronauts were themselves lionized and we still embraced
heroes.

Heroes must reflect what it is that we feel is best in ourselves, what we would
like to think we would have done under similar circumstances. Heroes make us
strive to live up to that ideal image. Without heroes, we must make do with
celebrities.

Today we somehow have misplaced the capacity to honor the achievements of people
striving to do something well. This may account for the fact that so few people
today actually qualify as heroes in the old sense, and for that reason the
country may have gone overboard in welcoming back the downed pilot Scott O'Grady
as a hero.

Perhaps the retelling of the Apollo 13 story will remind Americans of who we
were and who we want to think we are. Americans were in danger of being lost,
but once we brought them home.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A headline in The New York Times on April 17, 1970--Speeding
toward a gentle landing on Earth. This scene from "Apollo 13" was created by
computer artists; no NASA footage was used in the film. (Digital
Domain/Universal Pictures); Ed Harris, standing at center in white shirt, plays
the flight director Gene Kranz at Mission Control in Houston--Ban-Lon city. (Ron
Batzdorff/Universal Pictures)(pg. 22); The actual launching of Apollo 13 on
April 11, 1970, and, inset, Tom Hanks, left, Kevin Bacon and Bill Paxton in the
new film "Apollo 13." (Apollo launch (NASA)/inset (Ron Barzdorff/Universal
Pictures))(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              316 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT;
White House Traffic Ban Earns Mixed Reviews

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section 5;     Page 3;     Column 1;     Travel Desk

LENGTH: 742 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In the weeks since President Clinton announced the closing of Pennsylvania
Avenue in front of the White House, tourists and native Washingtonians have had
to make numerous adjustments.

About 26,000 cars and trucks drove that part of Pennsylvania Avenue between 15th
and 17th Streets every day. Now, traffic snakes out in all directions, clogging
downtown streets and making drive-by tourism a thing of the past.

At the same time, recreationists have discovered nirvana. Blissfully peaceful
and free from choking exhaust, the unencumbered expanse of the White House's
front yard is an oasis of serenity. It has become one of the best Rollerblading
runways in town. It provides commuting bicyclists a respite from the usual din,
and the 5,000 tourists who visit the White House daily can gaze at the mansion
without worrying about cars (or car bombers).

All this has occurred without changing a thing to prevent the kinds of assaults
that have bedeviled the Secret Service. As evidenced shortly after the closing
of Pennsylvania Avenue, a person can still scale the fence behind the White
House. One can, presumably, even still walk up to the front and fire a rifle
through the fence.

But closing the main drag may be only the first step in new security
precautions. Meanwhile, the new space has inspired esthetes to dream of what
might be. As long as part of Pennsylvania Avenue is closed, they reason, why not
do something in an organized way, much as envisioned by Washington's original
designer, Pierre L'Enfant? The broad expanse might be turned into a vast
pedestrian mall with fountains, benches, restrooms and trees, an idea that
President Clinton has recently endorsed. Some have suggested a national
competition for a design, similar to the contest held in 1982 for the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial.

While these plans ferment, local traffic engineers are trying to cope in the
here and now. The biggest of the proposed changes would be the redirection of
traffic on nearby streets. The next street north of Pennsylvania, H Street, now
two-way, would be made one-way going east; I Street, now one-way east, would go
one-way west. John Payne, the District of Columbia's traffic engineer, says this
would untangle some of the downtown traffic because cars coming from feeder
roads like New York Avenue could more naturally blend in and speed up the
crosstown flow.

Pedestrians venturing in and out of the traffic-free area may find it difficult
to cross streets because lots of drivers are sticking to their old patterns. Mr.
Payne said that this should eventually sort itself out, with the help of
$200,000 worth of new signal work, signing and pavement markings at the 50
intersections in the immediate area. (The Federal Government is to pay for the
changes -- a good thing, since the District is broke.) Contrary to published
reports, Mr. Payne said, parking meters in the vicinity will not be eliminated.
In fact, he said, more will be installed.

There are always the tour buses, but those who plan to take a bus face other
problems.  Consider the situation faced by Old Town Trolley Tours, which runs
two-hour sightseeing trips around town. "A lot of people take our tour who don't
have time to get off and visit," said Mark Berlin, the company's general
manager. But the clogged traffic has slowed down the trip. "Anything that
increases time cuts into our efficiency in taking people around the city," he
said.

Beyond that, he said, "This effectively has eliminated a view of the White
House," at least from the bus, a disappointment for those who are unable to get
off and walk a couple of blocks.

The White House is the jewel in the crown of Washington tourist attractions,
with most of the 15 million people who visit every year wanting to see it
(although less than a tenth of them actually take the free tour of the
interior).

The tour buses have arrangements with local hotels for picking up passengers,
and Mr. Berlin said that it would be difficult to change their long-established
tour routes because it would mean reprinting all of the brochures the company
hands out on the ride. "And we don't want to drop a hotel that's been supporting
us," he said.

Not only does the new setup obliterate the White House from view, but it also
obscures some of the other, quainter sites, like Blair House, the Old Executive
Office Building and Lafayette Park, where demonstrators warn of the end of the
world and such.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Washington showing closed streets and proposed direction or
traffic for streets most affected.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              317 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

To Russia With Caution

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER;      STEVEN ERLANGER is head of the Moscow bureau of
The Times.

SECTION: Section 5;     Page 13;     Column 1;     Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2544 words


IN the old days, traveling in Russia was difficult because of the bleakness and
the oppression. Today, even in the cherished summer, some of the bleakness
remains. But the main risk is the chaos born of new freedoms.

Whether it's the organized gang of taxi touts that greets you as soon as you
retrieve your suitcase or the gang of kids and teen-agers that can swarm around
you on a busy street, clutching at your clothes and grabbing for your purse or
wallet, Russia is no longer the safe Soviet haven for tourism.

Visitors, once protected against crime by the same intrusive secret police who
repressed dissidents, are on their own in an unprecedented way.

But that independence provides wonderful opportunities to travel across this
vast land as you please, without need of any permission other than your entry
visa. It means you no longer need travel in a group, with the itinerary and
options, including all meals and performances, chosen for you in advance. (When
I used to travel as a single person here, I would attach myself to a group in
order to get breakfast -- the kitchen made only enough for the groups, and
waiters looked at a lone traveler as a lunatic or a criminal.)

Today there's a wide range of choices for both lodging and food, from deluxe
hotels run by Western companies to bed and breakfasts.

The new freedom, simple as it seems, also means you can meet and talk to
whomever you like. But not everyone you meet will have your best interests at
heart.

In the old days, it was hard to interview an ordinary Russian, who would tend to
scurry away from a stranger on the principle that foreigners could get them into
trouble. Today, it's hard to stop them from talking -- and complaining.

In some ways, these days, while the state remains so weak and still has
pretenses to some democratic aspirations, the individual is getting his own
back. That's both good and bad for tourists. Good because so much more private
tourism is available -- you can walk around, window-shop, knock on doors, engage
ordinary people as you like, and poke into almost anything, especially if you're
prepared to pay.

But bad, because travel is simply less organized and more dangerous. The
collapse of the all-embracing Intourist system is great, but it's been replaced
by nothing. It's difficult to make reservations. Some prices, especially for
hotel rooms, are absurdly high for the level of service you receive -- sometimes
20 times the price Russians pay in what remains a two-tier pricing system. And
no one's really looking out for foreigners very much. Outside the big hotels
(just as in America), decent foreign-language skills are a rarity.

So it's a lot easier to get into trouble. You can go to a bar and meet some
jovial people and drink a little too much, and the next thing you know you're
lying in the gutter with a bad headache and no wallet.

Not surprisingly, given the problems and the easy emphasis on crime, tourism is
down, according to the Russian Federal Committee for Tourism. From a peak of 7.7
million foreigners entering the Soviet Union in 1989, the number plunged to only
3 million entering the former Soviet Union in 1992. In 1994, only 2.7 million
came to Russia. About a third of visitors are estimated to be business
travelers.

Crime and instability are the most obvious reasons for the falloff. Crime surged
after the collapse of the Soviet Union, but leveled off in 1993 and has begun to
drop in 1994. Nationwide, except for murders and crimes with firearms, the
numbers of rapes, assaults and crimes against property all dropped. In 1994, New
York had 8.3 times the number of rapes and 13.1 times the number of assaults as
Moscow, a larger city.

So here are some dos and don'ts, especially for the principal cities most
tourists visit, Moscow and St. Petersburg:

* Follow a Russian through the passport lines. Airports are much more crowded
now than the Soviet Union ever planned for, yet the passport police still take a
long time with every visitor while the visa is checked. Russians have an
unerring ability to slide through these lines, which can, too often, last 90
minutes or more.

* Get a luggage cart, even if you don't have rubles. The experience can be a
Russian Catch-22. The cart desk is supposed to take only rubles. But it's still
illegal to leave Russia with rubles, so it should be impossible to enter Russia
with rubles and thus impossible to pay rubles for your cart. Sometimes the desk
will take dollars. If it doesn't, the older fellows who collect empty carts will
happily do so, allowing you to avoid the desk altogether and provide another
boost to private enterprise.

* Try to arrange to be met at the airport by your hotel, given the taxi touts
mentioned above. Currently, the gang can demand up to $80 for the half-hour
drive into central Moscow. If you're not met and can manage your luggage, try to
get to the drivers outside the terminal or even beyond the airport gates.

* Try to buy round-trip tickets if you travel from Moscow to anywhere else
within Russia. Sometimes you will be able to buy only a one-way ticket and will
not be able to reserve a return. If so, buy your return ticket before leaving
the airport at your destination.

* If you are going from Moscow to St. Petersburg, fly. It's only an hour on a
good service called Pulkovo, a privatized part of the old Aeroflot, once the
country's only airline. The night train is romantic in principle, but there have
been many thefts. Criminals often pay off the conductors to open the cabins from
the outside, gas travelers and then go through the luggage, even that stowed in
under the beds.

* If you do take the train in Russia, wind some electrical cord or wire around
the locks on the inside, to prevent entry at night. The British Embassy has
developed its own interior lock (available only to its staff) to fit over the
ordinary one. Buy the whole four-bed compartment for yourself. Don't dress
flashily, get drunk or act like a rich Western tourist. (And bring your own
toilet paper.)

* Filter your water, even tap water, to prevent stomach problems. A filter with
a bit of iodine kills the giardia parasite, a particular problem in Petersburg.
If you get sick, Moscow and St. Petersburg have Western-run health clinics your
hotel will know about.

* Do not get too tipsy in public, and resist those companionable Russians, with
their endless toasts to peace and friendship, who enjoy drinking a foreigner
under the table.

* Do not get into a taxi if another passenger is already inside, because
sometimes the other passenger, in league with the driver, will rob you. Around
Moscow, 10,000 to 15,000 rubles (about $2 to $3) is a reasonable fare for
residents; foreigners pay more. If you don't speak Russian, don't pay more than
$10.

* If possible, avoid the taxi gangs hanging around your hotel. Go down the
street and flag down a cab instead.

* Do not check your baggage if you take a domestic flight. Russians don't risk
the loss or theft; why should you?

* Aeroflot is chancy, but usually there's no choice. Try to get on Transaero, a
new airline with Western planes and Israeli-trained crew. But it doesn't fly
everywhere in the country.

* Avoid the area around Kievsky Vokzal (the Kiev train station), near the
Radisson Slavayanskaya Hotel in Moscow. The area is a nest of thieves,
pickpockets and gangs of kids.

* Be attentive on the streets, particularly near the American Express office on
the Garden Ring in Moscow. Organized groups of kids pursue Westerners there and
try to rob them of the money they've just taken out of the Amex machine. If kids
surround you, don't be polite -- just take off. In St. Petersburg, similarly, be
careful on the walk to the Hermitage Museum; look out for gangs of kids.

* In hotels, check the prices for international phone calls before you chat
away. A 15-minute phone call can cost the price of the room itself.

* In restaurants, especially the ones with prices listed in dollars, check the
cost of extras like wine, coffee and bottled water, which can be wildly
expensive. In Moscow, one can eat worse for more money than in almost any other
city on earth.

* Do not buy any lacquered box that says Palekh (or any of the other major
artistic villages, like Fedoskino, Kholui or Mstera) if it is too cheap. You're
only buying a fake. A good Palekh box of medium size, if painted only on the
top, should cost no less than $125, and probably more.

* When leaving Russia, make sure you do not list any more money or valuables
than you did on your customs form when you entered. Indicate less money and the
same valuables.

But do look beyond the difficulties to what remains one of the most interesting
places on earth: from its gingerbread wooden churches, fine museums and poignant
palaces to its gulags and mummified Communist saint, Lenin.

The Marquis de Custine had a dour, though insightful view of Czarist Russia in
the 1830's and 1840's, through which he traveled, Tocqueville-like.

Writing to a friend with a headstrong son, he advised: "Whenever your son is
discontented in France, I have a simple remedy: tell him to go to Russia. The
journey is beneficial for any foreigner, for whoever has properly experienced
that country will be happy to live anywhere else."

Well, it's still beneficial, but there's also a lot to see and amusement to be
had. Russia is joining the world very quickly, and like most places that have
been stagnant for a long time -- Vietnam or Cambodia, for two recent examples --
the best time to see them is soon, before a McDonald's and a Holiday Inn spring
up on every corner.



Choices in two cities
Moscow

HOTELS: The Moscow telephone code is 095. Travel agents can probably do better
on room prices. For tours use the concierge at your hotel or try Patriarchi Dom,
a decent tour agency, at 255-4470, weekdays 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.

The National, 1 Tversakaya Street; telephone 258-7000, fax 258-7154. In 1918,
Lenin stayed -- and schemed -- in this superb landmark on Red Square, which
reopened in May after a long, fitful renovation. Singles and doubles with
air-conditioning, satellite television and minibar are $310 to $420 (prices
calculated at 5,000 rubles to the dollar), including tax and service; suites
$450 to $1,200. Six restaurants. Nonsmoking rooms available.

Baltschug Kempinski Moskau, 1 Balt schug Street; 230-6500, fax 230-6503.
Glittering renovated German-run hotel on the Moscow River offers wonderful views
of Red Square and the Kremlin. Double rooms with television are $414 to $500,
including tax and service (rates are in German marks; prices calculated at 1.4
marks to the dollar); suites from $685 to $1,557. Breakfast buffet $21. Extra
bed $43.

Marco Polo Presnja, 9 Spiridonevsky Pereulok; 202-4834, fax 956-6306. Small,
moderately priced renovated Austrian-run hotel a short walk from Patriarch's
Pond in Central Moscow. Single, with tax and service, is $228, including buffet
breakfast; double, $246; suite $350. Business center with telephone and fax
services, health club, car rentals.

RESTAURANTS: Azteca, 956-8489. Craving a little pico de gallo at 3 A.M.? This
24-hour Tex-Mex hit on the 20th floor of the Intourist Hotel, 3-5 Tverskaya
Street, sates New Russian clientele with nachos, refried beans, cheese and pico
de gallo ($8), quesadillas ($5), shrimp salad ($10) and margaritas. Breakfast
daily 4 to 11 A.M. Children's menu. Nightly entertainment. There's a branch at
11 Novoslobodskaya Street, 972-0511. Many of the staff's members are Cuban
students still hanging on here.

Patio Pizza, 13A Volkhonka Street, 201-5000. A good place for lunch after the
Pushkin Museum across the street. Moscow's best pizza (from $5), plus pasta,
smiling service and all-you-can-eat salad bar ($6) under a glass-canopied
terrace bring the ambiance of a nice American mall to downtown Moscow. Visa,
Mastercard, American Express. No reservations taken. Daily noon to midnight.

Iberia, 5-7 Rozhdestvenka Street, 928-2672. Traditional Georgian cuisine, with
nightly entertainment. Dishes include khachapuri ($6), a cheesy, quichelike
Georgian bread served warm; lobio, a bean-based dish ($4), and grilled meat ($8)
plus Georgian wines. Reservations recommended. Daily noon to midnight; kitchen
closes at 11:30. American Express.

U Babushki, 42 Bolshaya Ordinka Street, 230-2797. Literally, At Grandma's Place,
this Russian restaurant close to the old Tretyakov Gallery is among the best and
best value. Blini and borscht, fried mushrooms and sturgeon or suckling pig are
served in an intimate, parlorlike setting with framed photos and other trifles
from "Grandma's." Appetizers $3 to $13. Caviar, $10. Open daily noon to 4 A.M.
Mastercard, Visa.

St. Petersburg

Telephone code: 812. For tours, contact the concierge at your hotel, or the
travel bureau of the Astoria Hotel.

HOTELS: The city offers less range than Moscow -- either luxe or fin-de-regime
Soviet lackluster. Top hotels are on or abutting Nevsky Prospekt and its rich
cultural, esthetic and culinary offerings.

Grand Hotel Europe, 1-7 Mikhailovskaya Street, 119-6000. Beautifully restored,
Swedish-run 302-room luxury hotel in pre-revolutionary landmark with Art Nouveau
interiors and Baroque facade. Just off Nevsky Prospekt. Singles from $243,
doubles for $276 and suites up to $1,400, plus 21.5 percent tax. Extra bed $33.
Buffet breakfast $20. Good room service.

Nevsky Palace, 57 Nevsky Prospekt, phone and fax 275-2001. A decent new hotel,
Austrian-run, in the middle of Nevsky Pros pekt. Singles $280, doubles $334,
suites $365 to $456. Rates include buffet breakfast and tax. Nonsmoking rooms,
five restaurants.

Astoria, 39 Bolshaya Morskaya Street; 311-4206, fax 315-9668. Nicely restored
hotel in the shadow of St. Isaac's Cathedral. Single- or double-occupancy rooms
$170 to $210. Apartment-style suites $400 to $600. Extra bed, 50 percent of room
rate.

Pribaltiskaya, 14 Korablestroitely; 356-4135, fax 356-4496. Drab 1,200-room
lodging in late Intourist style, but cheaper. On the Gulf of Finland, five miles
from city center. Doubles with bath and cable television are $160. Extra bed for
children under 12 provided free. Hotel taxis to center, $10 to $12.

RESTAURANTS: Sadko's, in the Grand Hotel Europe; 329-6000 (ask operator for
Sadko's). St. Petersburg's favored expatriate enclave. Chicken wings, burgers
and sundaes for the homesick. Hearty appetizers are $4 to $7, entrees are $8 to
$11 and desserts are $4. Major credit cards. Daily noon to midnight. Reserve
weekends, when there is live music at night.

Afrodite, 86 Nevsky Prospekt; 275-7620. The city's best fish restaurant is a
Finnish-Russian venture opposite the Nevsky Palace Hotel. Entrees include
grilled salmon ($16), steamed turbot ($16) and fine smoked sturgeon with
horseradish sauce ($14). Wide array of French and Spanish wines. Open daily noon
to midnight. Dinner for two with wine, coffee, is about $100 without dessert.
Visa.

Tandoor, 2 Voznetsensky Prospect; 312-3886. Near the Hermitage. Traditional
Indian dishes, from curry to kefir to chicken tikka. Stress extra spice if you
want it. Appetizers are $2 to $6 and entrees are $8 to $12. Major credit cards.
Open daily noon to 11 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Porters with luggage carts outside Sheremetyevo Airport,
Moscow. (Oleg Vlasov/MIR Agency, for The New York Times)(pg. 14); Pickpockets
try to distract tourists near the Kiev station in Moscow. (Oleg Vlasov/MIR
Agency, for The New York Times)(pg. 13)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              318 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Phnom Penh's Faded Beauty

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON;      PHILIP SHENON is head of the Bangkok bureau of
The Times.

SECTION: Section 5;     Page 13;     Column 1;     Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2576 words


AT sunset, when the reddish tropical sun begins to melt behind the gabled
gold-green rooftop of the Royal Palace, it is possible to imagine just how
lovely Phnom Penh must have been.

There are still touches of that beauty in the Cambodian capital -- the crumbling
ocher villas that are the legacy of the French colonialists, the bougainvillea
spilling over the old stone fences like purplish lava; the fleets of rickety
one-man fishing boats as they bob in the sun-dappled waters of the Mekong, the
monks parading barefoot along the palm-lined river bank, clutching their black
lacquer bowls in search of their daily offerings of rice.

But maintaining the beauty and charm of Phnom Penh has become secondary to the
daily struggles of survival, and so trash collects, and slums appear. It is a
city still fighting to catch its breath after a generation of bad fortune and
bloodshed.

For anyone who fails to read beyond the headlines, Phnom Penh must seem an
unlikely travel destination -- the Southeast Asian counterpart to Sarajevo or
Beirut. Cambodia is still at war, a fact that is enough to frighten away many
potential visitors even though the fighting goes on far from Phnom Penh. If
travelers come to the city at all, it is usually for a one-day stopover en route
to Cambodia's major tourist attraction, the magnificent stone temples of the
ancient capital of Angkor, which is an hour's flight to the northwest.

But that's a shame. I've always thought that whatever its struggles, Phnom Penh,
a city of some 700,000 people, remains one of the fascinating capitals of
Southeast Asia. It is surely not a destination for tourists seeking a
postcard-pretty vision of the Far East; there are other, far easier places
across the border in Thailand to find glittering temples and manicured tropical
gardens.

Instead Phnom Penh is a destination for adventurous travelers who are aware of
the risks but want to experience one of the most distinctive and beguiling
cultures in Southeast Asia, and who also want to try to understand how that
culture was nearly wiped out by the terror unleashed 20 years ago this April,
when the Maoist-inspired guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge overran Phnom Penh.

The Khmer Rouge are still around, returned to the jungle once again as
guerrillas, and -- make no mistake -- they are a threat to foreign travelers who
foolishly venture far out into the countryside. They killed three Western
backpackers last September after ambushing a train in rural southern Cambodia
and they have claimed responsibility for the murder of a Texas woman in January
when she traveled on an isolated road 15 miles outside Angkor.

But, as harassed officials of the Cambodian Tourism Ministry keep stressing, it
is a mistake to confuse the situation in the capital with the situation in the
deep countryside.

In Phnom Penh, there have been few safety problems for foreign visitors, and the
city is almost certainly safer than any city of equal size in the United States.
I have been to Phnom Penh perhaps a dozen times in the last three years and,
traveling mostly by foot or by pedicab, have never have had a serious problem.
With few exceptions, Cambodians are a gentle, friendly people (a fact that makes
their ugly modern history all the more confounding).

If there is a time to visit the Cambodian capital, it is probably now. The
Government is talking about tearing down some of its most poignant -- and
important -- monuments because they are associated with the Khmer Rouge era,
including a large pagoda on the outskirts of the city that enshrines the skulls
of thousands of the victims of the Khmer Rouge. While their loss would be a blow
for historians searching for the truth of what went on there in the 1970's, the
Government fears that the Khmer Rouge monuments and museums frighten away as
many visitors as they attract.

And by visiting Cambodia during what is an undeniably difficult period, visitors
are helping a country that desperately needs their hard currency.

The lifeblood of the city are the three rivers that converge there -- the
Mekong, the Tonle Sap and the Bassac -- and for that reason alone visitors able
to splurge should stay at the Hotel Sofitel Cambodiana, the modern
French-managed hotel built on the banks of the Tonle Sap, and the only hotel
with a river view.

The Cambodiana was the dream of King Sihanouk, but construction came to a halt
when he was ousted in a 1970 coup. (The eccentric King, one of the great
survivors of the 20th century, ended his exile in 1991 and has been returned to
the throne.) Construction resumed in the 1980's, and today the hotel offers
comfortable air-conditioned rooms with spectacular views out onto the Tonle Sap
and the Mekong and the lively commerce that the rivers support.

City tours can be arranged through the hotel or any one of several tour agencies
around town, but I have always preferred to strike out on my own in Phnom Penh,
clutching my map and frayed copy of the "Lonely Planet" guidebook to Cambodia.
(Although some of its information is out of date, the guide is deservedly the
bible among travelers to Cambodia.)

On every street corner there are pedicabs, three-wheeled bicycles with a seat in
front for passengers, with ever-smiling Khmer drivers who will be pleased to
pedal you almost anywhere in the city for $1. The American dollar serves as a
second currency there. "For $1, I will take you to Thailand," said my driver,
Pok, laughing as we set off for an excursion around the city.

If it is hot, and Phnom Penh can be like a furnace, especially in the late
spring, an air-conditioned taxicab may be the only solution, and they are
available outside the Cambodiana and other major hotels. Some drivers speak
English, and a handful speak good English.

Most trips should begin in the vicinity of the city's most beautiful and best
preserved monument, the Royal Palace, which is separated from the Tonle Sap by a
pleasant green park that functions on weekend evenings as a lively meeting place
for Cambodian families.

Visitors are generally barred from the palace grounds, although it is possible
to get a good glimpse of the compound through two large gates along the eastern
entrance, facing the river. Construction of the palace was completed in February
1870 for King Norodom, the great-uncle of King Norodom Sihanouk.

INSIDE the compound are several buildings painted in shades of gold and green
that house a throne room, a performance hall for the royal ballet and private
apartments for the King and his family. The apartments served as the prison for
King Sihanouk when he was held captive in the palace by Pol Pot, the notorious
Khmer Rouge leader, in the late 1970's.

One portion of the palace compound is open to the public, the Silver Pagoda, and
it is well worth a visit since it one of the few monuments left in Phnom Penh
that still capture the splendor of the Khmer empire, which once included most of
what is now called Indochina.

The pagoda, built in 1892 and renovated in the 1960's, is named for the 5,000
silver tiles covering the floor. The staircase leading to the pagoda is made of
Italian marble and inside there stands a life-size golden Buddha sparking with
more than 9,000 diamonds.

Even as the atheistic Khmer Rouge destroyed most other religious shrines in the
city, they preserved the Silver Pagoda, apparently to fool foreign dignitaries
into believing they were interested in saving ancient Khmer culture.

A block north of the palace is the National Museum of Khmer Art and Archeology,
a structure of traditional Cambodian design built during World War I. It houses
several masterpieces of Khmer art, including stone statues from Angkor. (The
more Angkor statuary moved into the museum the better, given the amount of
thievery going on at the temples themselves, most of it organized by criminal
rings based in Thailand.)

Visitors to the handsome old structure cannot help but notice the incessant
squeaking from the roof. It is the chatter of thousands of fruit bats that took
roost in the ceiling during the Khmer Rouge years, when no one cared for the
building. A renovation project is under way to relocate the bats.

The heart of Phnom Penh is the crumbling pagoda known as Wat Phnom, which sits
on a manmade hill that is the highest point in the city. Legend holds that the
hill, "penh" in Cambodian, was built in the 14th century at the request of a
wealthy woman named Penh, hence the name Phnom Penh, which means hill, or phnom,
of Penh.

The pagoda is filled with large gilded statuary of the Buddha, attended day and
night by worshipers carrying joss sticks and offerings of fruit and meat,
sometimes whole roasted pigs.

On the climb up the hill, visitors will be swarmed by young children who carry
cages filled with songbirds waiting for freedom. "Go bird free! Go bird free!"
they scream at visitors who look as if they might speak English. A few notes of
Cambodian riel, the local currency, will purchase a bird's freedom, which is
said to bring good luck.

What cannot be seen from Wat Phnom any longer is the old red-brick Roman
Catholic Cathedral that once stood a block away. The cathedral, another
architectural legacy of the French, was taken down brick by brick by the
atheistic Khmer Rouge.

On April 17, 1975, the troops of the Khmer Rouge entered Phnom Penh and launched
a Maoist-style social revolution more sweeping than anything Mao ever tried.
First, the city was evacuated, with more than a million people forced to walk to
the countryside, with no provision made for feeding or housing them.

Thousands of people, mostly old or ill, died in the exodus. A ghost town apart
from a few hundred Khmer Rouge officials, Phnom Penh began to rot and crumble in
the tropical heat, and the city's architecture has never really recovered from
those years of neglect.

Other buildings were destroyed because, like the cathedral, they symbolized for
the Khmer Rouge the decadence of old Cambodia. The new central bank building at
the corner of Tou Samouth Boulevard and 118th Street was built atop the ruins of
the old national bank, which was dynamited by the Khmer Rouge in 1975 because of
its association with capitalism. (Later, when Pol Pot realized it was impossible
to run an economy without money, he had Khmer Rouge currency printed up, and it
is now sold in the central market as a grisly sort of souvenir.)

With no one to witness the terror, certain buildings in Phnom Penh were
converted into torture centers, with political prisoners shipped into the city
to begin the terrible process of imprisonment and interrogation that would
inevitably end in their deaths. Most notorious among the buildings was Tuol
Sleng, a former high school in the southern part of the city that was converted
into the interrogation center known to the Khmer Rouge as S-21.

After the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia and ousted the Khmer Rouge, Tuol Sleng was
converted into a museum -- the "Museum of Genocidal Crime." And while nothing
about the museum and its exhibits is subtle, it is worth a visit if only to bear
witness to the victims of the slaughter.

Like the Nazis a generation earlier, the Khmer Rouge were meticulous in their
record-keeping, and so the most compelling rooms of the museum are those that
have been covered with thousands of black-and-white photographs of the victims
of S-21 on their way to the killing fields.

The Khmer Rogue also tried to wipe out what they considered the most decadent of
the Khmer arts -- Cambodia's highly stylized classical dance -- and most of the
nation's best dancers were killed, or died of starvation or disease..

But the Khmer Rouge did not find them all, and today Cambodia's freely elected
Government is trying to revive traditional dance with children's classes at the
Royal University of Fine Arts, behind the old Olympia Stadium. The classes are
open to visitors from about 8:30 A.M. to late morning, and it is quite a scene
as scores of young children take to the stage in the brilliantly colored dance
costumes of old Cambodia. They welcome an audience.



Places to stay, places to see, places to eat
Getting Around

The sidewalks of Phnom Penh are crumbling after a generation of neglect, so many
travelers prefer to reach the major sightseeing destinations by pedicab or taxi.
Still, intrepid pedestrians will find that a walking tour is possible. Many of
the major attractions are within a few blocks of one another. The city's streets
are generally safe at all hours, although a pedicab is a good idea after sunset
-- again, because of the disintegrating sidewalks.

At the airport, passengers are usually swarmed by insistent cab drivers offering
rides to hotels. Haggling should produce a fare of about $5 to the city in an
air-conditioned car. Among the drivers who speak some English is the
irrepressible Sok Sin, who can be reached by cellular phone at 15-91-4532.

When to Go

The best time of year to visit is November through January, when it is less hot.
Heavy rains and humidity bein in late April and last through early October.

Sightseeing

The Silver Pagoda, next to the Royal Palace on Samdech Sothearos Boulevard,
charges $2 admission. Open 7:30 to 11 A.M. and 2:30 to 5P.M.; closed Monday.
There are tour guides who speak at least a few words of English.

The National Museum of Arts, on 13th Street just north of the Royal Palace, asks
for a donation. Open 7:30 to 11 A.M. and 2:30 to 5 P.M.; closed Monday.

Tuol Sleng Genocidal Museum, on the western side of 113th Street, just north of
350th Street, asks for a donation. Open 7:30 to 11 A.M. and 2:30 to 5 P.M.;
closed Monday.

Accommodations

The Sofitel Cambodiana at 313 Sisowath Quay (formerly Karl Marx Quay), (855 23)
26 288, fax (855 23) 26 392, is the city's best, with 276 air-conditioned rooms
and splendid views. A double is $200 plus 10 percent tax and a 10 percent
service charge. There are two restaurants, tennis courts and a pool.

La Paillote Hotel (over the restaurant of the same name, see below), 130-53
234th Street, near the central market; (855 23) 22 151, fax (855 23) 26 513. Its
20 rooms are air-conditioned. A double is $30 a night.

Dining Out

Finding a decent meal in Phnom Penh was a struggle before 1991. But that year
thousands of United Nations peacekeepers began pouring into the city, bringing
with them restaurateurs who wanted to take advantage of the sudden presence of
so much hard currency. The United Nations is long gone, but some of the
restaurants have stayed. Perhaps the best, certainly the most reliable
restaurant in town is La Paillote at 130-53 234th Street, opposite the central
market, (855 23) 22 151 and 26 513. The Swiss owner's crusty baguettes and dark,
freshly brewed coffee are some of the best in Asia. The food is Continental,
much of the meat and fish is imported, and the grilled Norwegian salmon can be
delicious. The cost for dinner for one person with wine is about $20.

Cambodian food in Phnom Penh can be excellent. It has much in common with the
cuisines of Thailand and Vietnam, and the tangy sour fish soup known as samla
machou banle can be a special treat. But it is difficult to recommend Cambodian
restaurants, given nonexistent hygiene standards in too many of them, and their
fast-shifting ownership.

Ask at the Sofitel Cambodian Hotel to find out which Cambodian restaurants have
the hotel's current endorsement.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Photographs at the Tuol Sleng Museum of Genocide of victims of
the Khmer Rouge. (David Portnoy/Black Star, for The New York Times)(pg. 25); The
Royal Palace, the city's best preserved monument, is the home of King Norodom
Sihanouk and his family. Pupils at a school for Cambodia's highly stylized
classical dance. )(Photographs David Portnoy/Black Star, for The New York
Times)(pg. 13)

Map of Phnom Penh.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              319 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE TOWNS

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 14;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 4373 words



MUSIC

ALBERT MUSIC HALL The Pinelands Cultural Society presents "Sounds of the Jersey
Pines," a series of Saturday night concerts through the end of the year. The
program features live presentations of bluegrass, country and Pinelands music.
Admission: $4, or $1 for children under 12. 139 Wells Mill Road (Route 532),
Waretown. (609) 971-1593.

CONGRESS HALL, CAPE MAY Christopher O'Reilly, pianist. Today at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12, or $10 for the elderly and $6 for students. Congress Hall, Beach
Drive and Perry, Cape May. (800) 275-4278.

DUKE ISLAND PARK, BRIDGEWATER The Somerset County Park Commission starts its
free summer concert series with a program of 60's and 70's music performed by
the Sensational Soul Cruisers. Sunday at 7 P.M. (908) 722-1200, extension 221.

GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER Yanni. Thursday at 8:30 P.M. Tickets: $22.50 to $45.
Exit 116 on the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (908) 888-5011.

GIRALDA FARMS "A Salute to the Allies" is the theme of the 12th annual Giralda
Concert with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra. Today at 6 P.M. Tickets: $8, or
$3 for children under 12. Route 124, Madison. (201) 377-6622.

FAIR LAWN SUMMER MUSIC FESTIVAL The 35th annual festival kicks off today at 8:30
P.M. with the Symphonic Concert Band. Next Sunday at 8:30 P.M., enjoy community
dancing to the music of Tubby Tubello. Free, but bring your own chairs. Memorial
Park and Berdan Avenue, Fair Lawn. (201) 796-6746.

MEMORIAL PARK, MAPLEWOOD Arts Maplewood presents C. J. Chenier and the Red Hot
Louisiana Band with their New Orleans zydeco music. Saturday at 7:30 P.M. Free.
(201) 378-2133.

NEWARK MUSEUM "Noontime Jazz in the Garden" series. Thursdays at 12:30 P.M.
Through Aug. 10. Free. Dreyfuss Memorial Garden, 49 Washington Street, Newark.
(201) 596-6550.

OCEAN COUNTY LIBRARY The Garden State Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus present
a free concert in the courtyard celebrating American heritage by performing
patriotic songs, light classics and popular tunes. Saturday at 7:30 P.M. Free,
but bring your own chair. 101 Washington Street, Toms River. (908) 349-6277.

OCEAN GROVE SUMMER CONCERTS The eighth annual "Great Sousa Concert" with the
Allentown Band, conducted by Ronald Demkee. Tickets: $12. The Great Auditorium,
Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. (908) 775-0035.

PRINCETON UNIVERSITY The first annual Princeton Invitational Choir Festival
concludes with a Gala Final Concert with all the participating choirs. Today at
8 P.M. Free. Richardson Auditorium of Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 896-9330.


RAMAPO COLLEGE The Minolta Summer Music Fest presents four free Thursday night
concerts spanning a spectrum of musical tastes. First up, the Hanover Wind
Symphony. Thursday at 8 P.M. The Bandshell, 505 Ramapo Valley Road. Off Route 17
and 202 in Mahwah. (201) 529-7612.

RUTGERS ARTS CENTER The Rutgers Summerfest continues with Marian McPartland,
today at 2 P.M. Tickets: $22. Keyboard Extravaganza! Wednesday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16. Summerfest Chamber Players. Thursday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $16. Red,
White and Blue! with Frederick Urrey, tenor. Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $16.
Music From Aston Magna, Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $16. George Street at Route
18, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7511.

TINICUM PARK, BUCKS COUNTY The Riverside Symphonia's second annual outdoor
concert, on Saturday at 8 P.M., will feature a mix of light classical music and
American show tunes. Tickets: $10 or $3 for children. Route 32, 10 miles north
of New Hope, Pa. (215) 862-3300.

VETERANS' FIELD, EDGEWATER The New Jersey Pops Symphony Orchestra, directed by
Michael Buglio, performs classical works, Broadway show tunes and patriotic
music. Friday at 7:30 P.M. Free. River Road, Edgewater. (201) 744-1700,
extension 52.

WEST SIDE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, RIDGEWOOD The Metisse Piano Quartet with Carol
Rodland, violist; Jennifer Kloetzel, cellist; Chul-In Park, violinist, and Priya
Mayadas, pianist. Today at 7 P.M. Free. 6 South Monroe Street, Ridgewood. (201)
652-1966.

THEATER

BECKFORD THEATER, MORRIS MUSEUM In "Love Letters," a relationship is revealed
through a lifetime of correspondence. Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.;
next Sunday at 2 P.M. and July 6-9. Tickets: $17.50. 6 Normandy Heights Road,
Morristown. (201) 538-0454.

CAPE MAY WELCOME CENTER The Cape May Stage presents "Cape May on Fire," with
Eric Hissom and John Alvarez. Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15, or $12 for students and the elderly. 405 Lafayette Street, Cape
May. (609) 884-1341.

EAST LYNNE COMPANY "The Woman Question" features Susan Glaspell's "Supressed
Desires," Marie Jenney Howe's "Anti-Suffrage Monologue" and George Middleton's
"Unknown Lady." Today at 3 P.M. The Meadowlands Center for the Arts, Rutherford.
Also, Wednesday through July 8 at 8:30 P.M. at Lyle Hall of the First Methodist
Church, Cape May. Tickets: $14, or $12 for the elderly. (201) 863-6436.

FOUNDATION THEATER "Nunsense." Wednesday and Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M., Friday
and Saturday at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 8 P.M. Through July 9. Tickets: $15,
or $13 for students and the elderly. Burlington County College. Route 530,
Pemberton. (609) 894-2138.

GUGGENHEIM SUMMER THEATER "I Hate Hamlet." Thursday through Saturday at 8:30
P.M. and next Sunday at 7:30 P.M. Through July 9. Tickets: $17. Monmouth
University, West Long Branch. (908) 571-3475.

McCARTER THEATER "Family Secrets," with Sherry Glaser. Monday at 8 P.M. Tickets:
$20 to $30. A solo piano concert with George Winston. Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets:
$22 to $32. Sweet Honey in the Rock, a tradional African-American congregational
choral quintet, performs Saturday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $17 to $27. 91 University
Place, Princeton. (609) 683-8000.

NEW JERSEY SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL Harold Pinter's "Homecoming." Today at 2 and 7
P.M., Tuesday at 8 P.M., Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M., Thursday and Friday at 8
P.M. and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. "Julius Caesar" begins July 5. Tickets: $16 to
$30. Bowne Theater, Drew University, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison. (201) 408-5600.


PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE "The Secret Garden," a musical by Marsha Norman and Lucy
Simon, based on the novel by Frances Hodgson Burnett. Wednesday and Friday at 8
P.M., Thursday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M. Through
July 23. Tickets: $29 to $44. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.

ROOSEVELT PARK AMPHITHEATER The Middlesex County Department of Parks and
Recreation presents Plays-in-the-Park 1995. "Into the Woods." Wednesday through
Saturday at 8:30 P.M. "The Sound of Music" begins on July 12. Tickets: $3.
Edison. (609) 548-2884.

THEATERFEST "Lost in Yonkers," with Doris Belack. Today at 2 and 8 P.M. "On
Golden Pond." Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
and Sunday at 3 and 8 P.M. Through July 9. Montclair State University, Valley
Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (201) 655-5112.

MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES

ART MUSEUM, PRINCETON UNIVERSITY "Collaborative Landscape Photographs by Laura
McPhee, Class of 1980, and Virginia Beahan," an exhibition of 20 color
photographs, opens Thursday. Through Aug. 20. Free. Tuesday through Saturday, 10
A.M. to 5 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Princeton. (609) 258-3788.

BERGEN MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE "Edward Walsh Sculpture," nine abstract and
traditional sculptures created from stainless steel, granite and bronze. Through
July 16. "John Schettino: Drawings and Paintings," through July 30.
"Photographic Drawings" by David Horton. Through July 30. Tuesday through
Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Suggested admission:
adults, $2.50; children, $1. 327 East Ridgewood Avenue, Paramus. (201) 265-1248.


BERLEX LABORATORIES GALLERY "Moments in Time," original photographs by Janet
Engeman and Dwight Hiscano. Monday and Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesday through
Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 to 5 P.M. Through Aug. 10. 300
Fairfield Road, Wayne. (201) 540-1195.

BLACKWELL STREET CENTER FOR THE ARTS "Summer Daze," an exhibition of works by
all members of the center. Through Aug. 20. Thursday through Sunday, noon to 4
P.M. 32-34 West Blackwell Street, Dover. (201) 328-9628.

COOPER GALLERY "Tangible Insites," textural paintings and clay vessels by Susan
Hogan. Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 7 P.M. 295 Grove Street, Jersey City.
(201) 451-1074.

CORYELL GALLERY Oil paintings by Albert Bross, watercolors and acrylics by
Vincent Ceglia and watercolors by Charles Ross. Wednesday through Sunday, 11
A.M. to 5 P.M. Through July 5. 8 Coryell Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-0804.

CS SCHULTE GALLERIES "Duet: Dan Christensen -- 30 Years of Paintings; Elaine
Grove -- Recent Sculpture." Through July 14. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M.
to 5 P.M. 340 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201) 376-6900.

EVERHART GALLERY Abstract paintings by Jim Fuess. Tuesday through Saturday, 11
A.M. to 6 P.M. Through July 12. 117 South Maple Avenue, Basking Ridge. (908)
221-9007.

EXTENSION GALLERY "Hug the Noise," an exhibition of cast metal sculpture and
drawings by Sean Poreda. Monday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 60 Ward
Avenue Extension, Mercerville. (609) 890-7777.

GALLERY JUPITER "Recent Works," paintings by Evelyn Leavens. Monday through
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. 25 Church Street, Little Silver. (908) 530-8035.

GALLERY OF SOUTH ORANGE "Displacement," a collage by Peter Jacobs, and "Home," a
collage in mixed media by Valerie Sivilli, are on display. Today, 1 to 4 P.M.
Baird Community Center, 5 Mead Street, off Ridgewood Road, South Orange. (201)
378-7754.

GALLERY AT GENERAL PUBLIC UTILITIES Color photographs by H. Lisa Solon and
sculptures and paintings by David A. Angelini. Opens Saturday. Through July 30.
Free. Monday through Friday, 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 100 Interpace Parkway,
Parsippany. (201) 263-6684.

GUILD OF CREATIVE ART "Rhythms of Nature," a collection of landscapes,
watercolors, pastels and collages by Fran McIlvain. Through July 6. Tuesday
through Saturday, noon to 4:30 P.M. 620 Broad Street, Route 35, Shrewsbury.
(908) 741-1441.

HOUSE OF BRATA ART GALLERY "So Big, So Little," five paintings by John
Krushenick. Through Saturday. Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., and
Saturday, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. 46A Fairfield Street, Montclair. (201) 783-7348.

HUNTERDON ART CENTER A faculty exhibition of painting, sculpture and mixed-media
collages; "Sculpture and Collage," assemblage sculptures and photo collages by
Carol Rosen. Today, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908)
735-8415.

JAZZ 88 GALLERY Paintings and collages by Amy Kool and photographs by Cynthia
Carris with text by Jose Luis Alonso. Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Through July 23. 54 Park Place, Newark. (201) 624-8880.

JERSEY CITY MUSEUM "Albizu Lives," a visual commemoration. Through Sept. 16.
"The Nation Is Its People: Body and Soul of Lolita Lebron." Through Aug. 18.
"Joan Fine: Wall Reliefs." Through Aug. 18. Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, 10:30
A.M. to 5 P.M. and Wednesday, 10:30 A.M. to 8 P.M. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey
City. (201) 547-4514.

LEBANON MUSEUM "Details," color photographs by H. Lisa Solon. Tuesday and
Thursday, 9:30 A.M. to 5 P.M. 57 Muscanetcong River Road, Hampton. (908)
537-6464.

LONG BEACH ISLAND FOUNDATION OF ARTS AND SCIENCE "Choice Collection -- Crafts
1995," an exhibition and sale, and "LBI Art Foundation Faculty Exhibition."
Monday and Tuesday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., 120 Long Beach Blvd., Loveladies. (609)
494-3169.

MEADOWLANDS CENTER FOR THE ARTS "From Darkness Into Light," paintings and
drawings by Howard Lerner, through Friday. "Images, Dreams, Words and Marks," a
solo show of paintings and drawings by Lisa Pressman, starts Saturday. Through
Aug. 4. Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M., and Saturday and Sunday, 10
A.M. to 6 P.M. 1 Williams Plaza, Rutherford. (201) 939-6969.

MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION MUSEUM AND LIBRARY "Optical Delights:
Stereographic Views of Monmouth County" presents images of Victorian life.
Starts Tuesday. Through February 1996. Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4
P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M. Admission: $2 for adults, $1 for children and
$1.50 for the elderly. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (908) 462-1466.

MONMOUTH MUSEUM "Artists With Physical Disabilites" includes paintings,
photography, printmaking and sculpture. Opening reception today, 3:30 to 5 P.M.;
the exhibition begins Tuesday. Through Aug. 17. Tuesday through Saturday, 10
A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M. Brookdale Community College campus,
Lincroft. (908) 747-2266.

MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM "What Is a Print?" features the works of 60 artists and
demonstrates the wide range of prints produced in America over the last 150
years. Through today. "Still Life Works From the Collection" offers 13 paintings
by American artists ranging in style from 19th-century realism to 20th-century
modernism. Through September. Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M.
to 5 P.M.; Sunday and Thursday, 1 P.M. to 5 P.M. Admission: $4, or $3 for the
elderly and students with ID. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (201)
746-5555.

NEWARK MUSEUM "Gods and Goddesses in Indian Art" features paintings, cloth
hangings and tiny brass icons dating from the 11th to 19th centuries. Through
next Sunday. "The Arts of Nepal" includes sculptures and paintings of the
Himalayan kingdom. Through next Sunday. "Astronauts: The Star Travelers"
features photographs of the Apollo XI flight. Through Dec. 31. Wednesday through
Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.

NEWARK PUBLIC LIBRARY "Lasting Impressions: The Jewish Legacy of Greater Newark"
showcases the development of neighborhoods and culture in Newark by Jewish
residents. Through next Monday. Monday, Friday and Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5:30
P.M.; Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, 9 A.M. to 8:30 P.M. 5 Washington Street,
Newark. (201) 733-7798.

NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY "Moving Through Memory: Caribbean Folk Arts in New
Jersey." Through April 1996. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. 230
Broadway, Newark. (201) 483-3939.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM "Echizen: 800 Years of Japanese Stoneware," an
exhibition celebrating the history and art of potters. Through Aug. 7. "Baseball
in New Jersey: The Game of History." Through Aug. 27. Tuesday through Saturday,
9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M., and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. 205 West State Street, Trenton.
(609) 292-6308.

NOYES MUSEUM "Looking Due South: Paintings of South Jersey by Glenn Rudderow."
Through July 9. Wednesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. Admission, $3; the
elderly, $1.50; students and children under 18, 50 cents. Free admission on
Fridays. Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.

PALMER SQUARE, PRINCETON Strictly Art in Princeton at Palmer Square features the
works of more than 75 local artists. Watercolors, pastels, oil and acrylic
paintings, paper collages, sculptures, photographs and mixed-media creations
will be on display and on sale. Today, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Free. Palmer Square,
downtown Princeton. (908) 874-5247.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Renee Foosaner Art Gallery holds its sixth annual
Juried Exhibition of Miniature Art. Through July 30. Brookside Drive, Millburn.
(201) 379-3636, extension 2272.

PATERSON MUSEUM "Pencilworks: The Drawings of Jerry Winick" displays pencil
drawings noted for their details and photo-like realism. Through July 9. Tuesday
through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 12:30 to 4:30 P.M. 2
Market Street, Paterson. (201) 881-3874.

PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The Passaic County Cultural and Heritage
Council presents paintings and collages by Arnold Brown. Through July 20. Monday
through Friday, 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. Broadway and
Memorial Drive, Paterson. (201) 684-5448.

RABBET GALLERY "Five Sculptors: Clay, Wood, Metal." Through July 7. Monday
through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. 120 Georges Road, New Brunswick. (908)
828-5150.

RINGWOOD MANOR STATE PARK "50 Years Retrospective Art Exhibition" features the
works of Arthur J. Barbour in the Barn Gallery. Through July 9. "Printmaking and
Sculpture" offers the works of Barbara W. Frazier and Helene Hirmes in the West
Wing Gallery. Through next Sunday. Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 4:30
P.M., with a reception next Sunday, 2 to 4 P.M. Sloatsburg Road, Ringwood. (201)
962-7031.

SHEILA NUSSBAUM GALLERY "New Insights -- Rising Talent," an exhibition of the
work of John Bingham, glass craftsman; Andrew Braitman, painter, and Lisa
Gralnick, metal-
smith. Through July 8. Monday through Wednesday and Friday and Saturday, 10 A.M.
to 5 P.M., and Thursday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. 341 Millburn Avenue, Millburn. (201)
467-1720.

SHOE-STRING GALLERY "Presence by Absence," paintings by Peter Siegel. Saturday,
11 A.M. to 5 P.M. or by appointment. 111 First Street, Jersey City. (201)
420-5018.

STONY BROOK-MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION "Naturescape," an exhibition of
paintings by Christina Allen, Sarah Antin and Guy Ciarcia. Through July 22.
Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Titus
Mill Road, Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.

SWAIN GALLERIES "Recent Works," oils by Brian Townsend. Through July 20. Tuesday
through Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and Saturday, 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M. 703
Watchung Avenue, Plainfield. (908) 756-1707.

WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER. The New Jersey Photo Forum sponsors a show photographic
prints in the upstairs gallery. "Vietnam: 20 Years After the Fall" features the
silkscreen photography of Richard Gerstner in the downstairs gallery. Free.
Monday through Saturday, 1 to 4 P.M. 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.


WILLIAMS GALLERY "The Changing Landscape: Contemporary Interpretations of
Landscape Painting and Photography," by David Scott Leibowitz, Marlene Lenker
and Rena Segal. Through July 8. Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. 8
Chambers Street, Princeton. (609) 921-1142.

ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The George Riabov Collection of Russian Art includes
medieval icons, 19th-century landscapes and 20th-century costume and stage
design. The Kusakabe-Griffs Japonisme Gallery showcases Western art from the
late 19th and early 20th centuries, documenting the Japanese influence on
Western art. Free. Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and
Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New
Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.

SPOKEN WORD

BROOKDALE COMMUNITY COLLEGE "New Jersey Politics in 1995 -- What Is Right and
What Is Wrong?" with Tom Byrne, state Democratic chairman; Virginia Littell,
state Republican chairwoman, and Bobbi Horowitz, president of Hands Across New
Jersey. Today at 7:30 P.M. Free. Newman Springs Road, Lincroft. (908) 536-9078.

REEVES-REED ARBORETUM Michael Olohan of the water resource management department
of the Rutgers University Cooperative Extension Service presents "Watershed
Workshop," an illustrated lecture on how individuals can improve their
environment at home and in the community. Today at 3 P.M. Free. 165 Hobart
Avenue, Summit. (908) 273-8787.

FOR CHILDREN

FLAT ROCK BROOK NATURE CENTUR "In Search of the Giant Bullfrog," a pond ecology
workshop for children, invites youngsters 4 to 12 to take a closeup look at
frogs, tadpoles, fish and other aquatic life. The workshop for children 6 to 12
is from 1 to 2 P.M.; children 4 to 6 attend the workshop from 2:30 to 3:30. Fee:
$5, and registration is required. 443 Van Nostrand Avenue, Englewood. (201)
567-1265.

MEADOWLANDS AREA The Mighty Morphin Power Rangers. Today at 1 and 4:30 P.M.
Tickets: $9.50, $14, $18.50 and $30. 50 Route 120, East Rutherford. (201)
935-3900.

MEADOW THEATER "Behind the Scenes" offers a hands-on tour of the theater that
will allow children to try on costumes and makeup, operate sound effects and
lights, and rehearse and perform a scene on stage. Today at 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
The Meadow Kids' Summer Clubhouse offers a new show every week with audience
participation, songs, games, dancing, improvisations and short plays. Saturday
at 11 A.M. Through Aug. 26. Tickets: $5. Galleria Atrium, Bridge Avenue and West
Front, Red Bank. (908) 758-0099.

NEWARK MUSEUM "Cosmic Questions," for ages 6 to 10, at 1 and 3 P.M., and
"Journey Through Time and Space," for ages 9 and older, at 2 and 4 P.M. Today.
"The Power" and "African Skies" begin next week. Adults, $2; children under 12,
$1. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (201) 596-6550.

NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS "Native American Crafts" allows children ages
6 to 8 to create Indian designs on clay pitchers and in seed bead necklaces and
sand paintings. Fee: $32, with all materials provided. Tuesday and Thursday,
3:30 to 5 P.M. 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.

NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Take a simulated flight down the 3,000-mile-long Martian
Grand Canyon in "Fantastic Sky." Saturday and Sunday at 1 and 3 P.M. Learn about
the greenhouse effect and holes in the ozone layer in "Spaceship Earth."
Saturday and Sunday at 2 P.M. Through next Sunday. Tickets: $1. 205 West State
Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6308.

PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE The Gingerbread Players present "Mozart, Monsters and
Matisse," a production combining puppetry and music to tell the tales of "Little
Blue," "Tamino and Dorabella" and "Why the Willow Weeps." Today at 11 A.M.
Tickets: $6 and $7. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (201) 376-4343.

RARITAN VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE The college's planetarium offers "Mystery! Who
Stole the Night," a show that is part legend, fairy tale, science documentary
and classic mystery yarn, for the entire family. Monday and Wednesday at 2 P.M.
Through Aug. 16. Admission: $4.50. Route 28 and Lamington Road, North Branch.
(908) 231-8805.

WEISS ART CENTER The Summerfun Sampler Series presents Allyn Gooen, a balloon
artist who offers a balloon version of "Snow White." Wednesday at 1 P.M.
Tickets: $7. Lloyd Road and Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair. (201) 256-0576.

ZIMMERLI ART MUSEUM The Rutgers Collection of Original Illustrations for
Children's Literature: "Riders Up! Preparing for a Pony Race," an exhibition of
photographs and other materials by Barbara Beirne for her book about a young
girl and her pony as they prepare for their first race. Through July 31. Tuesday
through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Free.
Rutgers, corner of George and Hamilton Streets, New Brunswick. (908) 932-7237.

ETC.

CONGREGATION B'NAI TIKVAH It's that time of the year again: garage sale time.
The public is invited to come and sift through a collection of the
congregation's "treasures" and cast-offs. Today, 9 A.M. to 1 P.M. Finnegan's
Lane, just west of the intersection of Route 1, North Brunswick. (98) 297-0696.

COUNTY COLLEGE OF MORRIS The mini-foreign film festival concludes with
"Sweetie." Friday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $3. Dragonetti Auditorium in the Student
Center, 214 Center Grove Road, Randolph. (201) 328-5024.

DINNER AND THEATER The $42 ticket price includes a four-course meal and "Deep
Space Noir," an interactive and futuristic detective story. Saturdays, 8 P.M. Il
Giardino Restaurant. 41 Ridgedale Avenue, Cedar Knolls. (201) 301-0562.

GARDEN STATE ARTS CENTER The 1995 Spring Heritage Festivals conclude with the
Irish Heritage Festival today. A piping competition with 20 piping bands from
the tristate area starts the day off at 9 A.M. Other activities include an Irish
shopping village with sweaters, crystal, food and other imported goods. The
Celtic Cross, Richie O'Shea, Willie Lynch and Mike Bryne perform in the mall at
noon. Tickets: $10. Exit 16 on the Garden State Park Way, Holmdel. (908)
442-9200.

GREATER NEW JERSEY STAMP EXPO A chance to learn about postal history and
purchase stamps, postcards, postal supplies and other memorabilia. Today, 10
A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission: $2. Holiday Inn Springfield, Route 22 West,
Springfield. (201) 379-3779.

FLEA MARKETS The Englewood Flea Market offers food, old and new toys, clothes,
crafts and a performance by the EX-ZIB-ITS Jr. Steel Band. Saturday, 10 A.M. to
7:30 P.M. First and Fourth Streets parking lots, Englewood. (201) 567-5354. The
Chester Lions Club Flea Market offers craft items, linens, books, children's
clothing, housewares, plants and produce, makeup, jewelry, scarves, handbags and
other accessories. Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M, through Dec. 19. Beginning next
Sunday. Free. West Blackwell Street, Morris and Sussex Streets in downtown
Dover. (800) 555-6263.

MILLSTONE WATERSHED ASSOCIATION A series of night hikes for families will have
an emphasis on summer insects. "Firefly Parade," the first hike of the series,
will allow participants to explore the Watershed Reserve and to observe the
light show provided by several species of fireflies. Thursday, 8:30 to 10:30
P.M. Advance registration is required. Program fee: $7. Titus Mill Road,
Hopewell Township. (609) 737-7592.

NEW JERSEY FILM FESTIVAL "Exotica," July 7, and "New Jersey Media Arts
Exhibition," July 8. All show times 7 P.M. Tickets: $4. Rutgers University in
New Brunswick, College Avenue campus, Milledoler Hall, George Street and
Seminary Place. (908) 932-8482.

Sounds of Summer
Petula Clark performs her past and present vocal hits, including "Downtown," "My
Love" and "A Sign of the Times," in the ummer concert season opener.
PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE Tuesday at 8 P.M. Tickets: $25 and $30. Brookside Drive,
Millburn. (201) 376-4343.

Spanish Dance
Alan Tjaarda Jones, dancer, demonstrates "From Fencing to Fandango: Dance in
Imperial Spain."
RUTGERS ARTS CENTER Saturday at 6 P.M. Free. (908) 932-7511.

A Fairy Tale
The Pushcart Players present "Once Upon a Time," a musical collection of
children's tales with a contemporary spin for children ages 4 to 10.
MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERISTY Thursday at 11 A.M. Tickets: $7.50. Valley Road,
Upper Montclair. (201) 857-1115.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              320 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Soviet Dynamics

SECTION: Section 7;    Page 35;    Column 3;    Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 342 words


To the Editor:

In his intemperate response (Letters, June 4) to my essay on Soviet
historiography, Stephen F. Cohen unintentionally reinforces several of the
points I make.

If one carefully searches Mr. Cohen's major works, one can indeed find
occasional references to the authoritarian nature of Bolshevism, as it finally
evolved. It is central to his argument in his biography of Nikolai Bukharin,
however, that Bolshevism need not have evolved in such a fashion. In his view,
it contained a moderate element that was defeated by Stalin.

I find curious Mr. Cohen's claim that since he is not himself a socialist, he
has "no special interest" in what genuine socialism "might mean." It is part of
his job as a historian of the Soviet Union to understand the nature of
socialism, whatever his personal political beliefs.

Finally, Mr. Cohen must overcome his reflexive habit of labeling those who
disagree with him as cold warriors. His own work is the quintessential product
of the late cold war period when elements of the American intelligentsia
persuaded themselves that the democratic West, not the Soviet bloc, was
principally responsible for the continuing East-West conflict. In his
"Rethinking the Soviet Experience," for instance, he argued that advocates of
moderation within the Soviet ruling elite had always been defeated because
actions taken by "the West" had given Soviet hard-liners a pretext to stifle
reform. Thus, the rise of Hitler, the cold war, Vietnam, etc., all prevented the
Soviet Union from reforming. He even suggested that the election of Ronald
Reagan would lead to the defeat of moderation within the Soviet hierarchy. Such
simplistic analysis, ignoring as it does the internal dynamics of the Soviet
Union itself, has been discredited by the masses of new information pouring out
of the former Soviet Union.

As I wrote at the end of my essay, passions still run too strong for any new
historical consensus to emerge. I thank Mr. Cohen for confirming my judgment.

STEVEN MERRITT MINER
Athens, Ohio

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              321 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHATTER: POMP AND CIRCUMSTANCE;
Pain and Sadness

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 3; Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 74 words


I am the second member of my extended family to graduate from college, so it was
to be a grand event. Robert Kennedy was shot in the hallway of a California
hotel the night before my graduation ceremony, and he died the day of it. My
friends and I were all active against the war in Vietnam, so our graduation
celebrations were deeply colored with pain and sadness at the passing of this
man who held out some hope.

BOB GRANT
Denville

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              322 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
One Perverse Distinction New York Can't Claim

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section 4;     Page 4;     Column 4;     Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


IT is an article of faith among New Yorkers that if it happens in the Big Apple
it is either top of the heap or bottom of the barrel.

The famous New Yorker cover by Saul Steinberg showing the Manhattan skyline
dwarfing the rest of the United States is a wry expression of New York City's
outsized ego. That self-centeredness is also evident in the best-worst way New
Yorkers rank their museums and their murder rate, their home teams and homeless,
their roguish politicians and percolating night life.

Yet despite the way many of them gripe about New York City's schools as if they
were in the national cellar, they are, by several measures, better than most
urban school systems.




'His Brother Was Worse'

With 47.5 percent of the city's students scoring above grade level on reading
tests and 50.3 percent above grade level in math, according to results released
June 12, New York City fares better than all but one of the 10 largest urban
systems, and the gap with first place San Diego is small. In Los Angeles,
Chicago, Miami and Philadelphia, only a third of the students read above the
national average, though they perform somewhat better in mathematics.

New Yorkers long exasperated with their schools may see the distinction as
something like the tribute in the story about a scoundrel's funeral where no one
could be found to deliver a eulogy until one mourner piped up: "His brother was
worse!" Still, New York City's educational ranking, experts say, tells much
about its uniqueness among cities.

For one thing, New York City's sprawling geography and its place as the world's
center of finance and communications has allowed it to retain more of a middle
class willing to send its children to public schools than cities like Detroit or
Newark, experts say. Economic class correlates closely with academic
achievement, and middle-class families in leafy neighborhoods like Bayside and
Douglaston in Queens -- where 80 percent of the students scored above grade
level -- tend to be more demanding of their schools.

"You've got a wider mix of students than most school systems that have largely
been abandoned by the middle class," said Michael Casserly, director of the
Council of Great City Schools, which keeps statistics on the 50 largest systems.

As the nation's legendary port for immigrants, the city attracts thousands of
students who may be poor but are hungry for the achievement that may have eluded
their nomadic parents. It is even favored by its particular immigrant mix. The
city's Asians, for example, tend more often to come from relatively stable
countries like China and Korea than from countries like Vietnam and Cambodia
where children were swept up in political turbulence and lost crucial school
years.

"With immigrant populations, you get high-achieving kids, but you also get kids
who are illiterate in their own language," said Diane Ravitch, author of "The
Great School Wars: A History of New York City Public Schools" (Basic Books,
1974). "But compared to other cities New York has a more dynamic mix of the kids
who are incredibly ambitious and striving."

Reading and math data, of course, must be interpreted delicately. The 10 largest
cities use five different exams, test different grades and sometimes exclude all
bilingual and special education students, thereby inflating their scores.

Still, New York City -- which in recent weeks has been struggling with a
departing chancellor, a flurry of sexual abuse incidents involving teachers and
school guards, spoiled food in some lunch programs and decaying school buildings
-- is nevertheless blessed by several hoary traditions.

Emanuel Tobier, a professor of planning at New York University, cites the city's
strong civil service system and that it is linked to merit. Just as its public
housing managers are among the nation's best, so its teaching and administrative
staffs have been somewhat shielded from the patronage and nepotism dogging other
cities.

Tom Loveless, who studies education policy at Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government, points out that New York State's Regents examinations force teachers
to teach to a moderately high standard. And, he notes, New York City spends more
per pupil than many urban systems, particularly those in California and Texas.

Finally, because of its vibrancy and cultural life, the city has always
attracted more than its share of imaginative people, and so have its schools.
Over the decades, it has come up with some of the country's most celebrated
innovations, including some of the first selective schools in the country, like
the Bronx High School of Science and Stuyvesant, which have helped it retain
bright children whose parents might otherwise depart for the suburbs. It is no
accident that New York City turns out a sizable percentage of the 40 winners of
the Westinghouse Science Talent Search.

"New York City is a very sophisticated town," conceded Eugene Campbell,
superintendent of Newark's ailing public schools, "and they know how to deal
with things on a sophisticated level."

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              323 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Forward to Middlescence

BYLINE: By Carol Tavris;   Carol Tavris, a social psychologist, is the author of
"The Mismeasure of Woman" and "Anger: The Misunderstood Emotion."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1668 words



NEW PASSAGES
Mapping Your Life Across Time.
By Gail Sheehy.
498 pp. New York: Random House. $25.

A BOOK reviewer goes through many passages, from Inner Turmoil (feelings of
insecurity and incompetence) to Outer Aggravation (worries about deadlines and
interruptions). Some reviewers remain stuck in Sloughs of Despond; others steer
a course through the Storms of Doubt into the Seas of Serenity, where they
remain until the next assignment.

Everyone loves passages, those mystical corridors that lead us from where we
have been to where we are going; and if the destination is unknown -- visiting a
new country, surviving an illness, growing older -- we are all grateful for a
good map. Gail Sheehy's book "Passages: Predictable Crises of Adult Life"
(1976), was hugely popular precisely because it offered such a chart (and also,
I suspect, because so many New Yorkers so enjoyed playing Guess the Pseudonym as
they read Ms. Sheehy's portraits of the rich and famous in states of distress
and dishabille).

The irony was that "Passages" was out of date at publication, because the great
demographic truth was that most people were no longer having predictable crises
or traveling through Eriksonesque stages. The economy was requiring the labor of
women and two incomes per household, thus precipitating the rebirth of feminism;
life expectancy was increasing; divorce, remarriage and cohabitation statistics
were soaring. In short, the traditional markers of adult development --
marriage, parenthood, promotion, retirement -- were crumbling. It seemed that no
one was doing anything in the familiar order, what with so many first babies
being born to unmarried mothers of 15 and 45. The success of "Passages," in
fact, might well have reflected people's awareness that the world was slipping
out of control; the book calmed anxieties by imposing predictability on a life
cycle that was, for most, increasingly uncertain.

Today, millions of people have lost not only the sense that life is predictable
but also the explanatory systems that gave meaning to life's ups and downs --
traditional religion, Marxism, Freudianism, patriotism, the work ethic -- and so
feel rudderless and adrift. With her unerring sense of timing and eye for
cultural trends, Ms. Sheehy now offers "New Passages," an optimistic analysis of
adult development in pessimistic times. For those who are unmotivated and
confused, worried about losing their jobs or afraid of aging and death, she
brings good news about growing older and reassurances that even doubts and
despair can be a normal passage to a reinvigorated life.

"New Passages" is a vast improvement over its predecessor, because it is
grounded in the economic and psychological realities that make adult life so
complex today. The major themes of this book are accurate and important:

* There is no longer a "standard life cycle"; the once predictable milestones of
adult development are gone forever. Still, every age cohort or generation shares
certain social, educational and economic experiences that make it different from
other generations.

* No one, male or female, should rely on only one source of identity and
satisfaction, because he or she will become "more vulnerable to sudden changes
in economic or personal conditions"; such changes are now the norm.

* The major task for people in their middle years is to decide what they will do
with their "second adulthood" -- the 30 or 40 healthy years that they are likely
to have left if they reach 50. Too many people, Ms. Sheehy warns, are unprepared
financially and psychologically for the second half of life.

* The secret to the search for meaning is to "find your passion and pursue it
with whole heart and single mind."

Ms. Sheehy uses Census Bureau data to draw demographic portraits of generations
across time; several hundred interviews with individuals and focus groups across
the country, which provide lively and vivid examples of the differences between
generations and sexes; replies from a survey given to diverse but
unrepresentative samples, including affluent professionals and the more
working-class readers of Family Circle; and academic research. Her basic
conclusions have been supported by many studies of different age groups and
generations and of groups of people followed over time.

Book 1 of "New Passages," called "First Adulthood," describes the different
generations that now uneasily coexist: the World War II Generation (born between
1914 and 1929), the Silent Generation, which noisily set off the civil rights
and feminist movements (1930-45), the Vietnam Generation (1946-55), the Me
Generation (1956-65) and the Endangered Generation (1966-80). Ms. Sheehy gives
the last cohort this apt label because, as the first generation that grew up
coping with a high parental divorce rate, AIDS, guns in the schools and in the
streets, and downward mobility, its common experience is one of fear and
pessimism in matters of sex, relationships, money, jobs and physical safety.

First adulthood, according to Ms. Sheehy, lasts roughly to age 45, at least if
you are a member of the World War II or Silent generations and did what you were
supposed to do to be a grown-up. But the baby boomers (the Vietnam and Me
generations) have had the most prolonged adolescence in history; their refrain
is "Who, me, an adult? But I'm not ready!" Ms. Sheehy perfectly captures the men
in their 30's and 40's who have never been able to commit to one partner and who
have unrealistic expectations about their jobs, relationships and
responsibilities.

Many baby-boom women have unrealistic expectations too, Ms. Sheehy says,
especially the "late babymania" that strikes some boomer career women in their
40's. She observes that many of these women are motivated less by a need to
reproduce than by pressure to perform for younger husbands; a terror of aging; a
cultural ideology that still conveys the message that the most important thing a
woman can do is produce babies; and a $2-billion-a-year infertility business
that feeds the delusion of fertility -- and youth -- forever. Ms. Sheehy is
rightly worried about what will happen when society finds itself left with a
generation of young-adult orphans, let alone a cohort of 60- or 70-year-old
parents of teen-agers. There are other ways of satisfying the desire to nurture
the next generation, she suggests, such as coaching or teaching children on a
volunteer basis, becoming more involved with one's friends' or relatives'
offspring or working on projects that will benefit children.

Yet Ms. Sheehy's criticism of late babymania differs for the goose and the
gander. She takes a sharp swipe at "the first graduates of the women's movement"
who "strapped on male values like battle gear," she says. "But beneath the jump
suits and boots their female instincts were suffocated -- at least for the
duration of their First Adulthood." Serves 'em right if now they are infertile.
Yet she seems delighted by the many "Start-Over Dads" who have children late in
life, having devoted their early years to their careers. Unlike those selfish
and self-deluded older mothers, apparently, an S.O.D. benefits from having the
time to be a "fully nurturant co-parent," because "success as a nurturing father
is actually good for a man's mental and physical health" -- especially if you
are famous, like Frank Gifford (an S.O.D. at 59), Clint Eastwood (at 63) or
Norman Lear (in his early 70's).

Book 2, "Second Adulthood," traces people's lives from 45 to 65 ("the Age of
Mastery") and from 65 to 85 and beyond ("the Age of Integrity"). According to
Ms. Sheehy, "the years between 45 and 55 constitute a bonus stage -- truly new
territory," a "middlescence" that is comparable to adolescence: "Turning
backward, going around in circles, feeling lost in a buzz of confusion and
unable to make decisions -- all this is predictable and, for many people, a
necessary precursor to making the passage into midlife." (Whether you regard
this behavior as a necessary precursor of change or self-indulgent and immature
whining depends of course on which generation you belong to.)

Ms. Sheehy spends 9 of her 19 chapters on this "new territory," which includes,
she says, the dawning awareness of mortality; the "vanity crisis" that strikes
both sexes; and menopause, female and male varieties. Women (as many studies
confirm) hit their peak during this decade, shifting from a focus on pleasing
others to mastering new talents for themselves. But many men who are now in
their 50's are caught, Ms. Sheehy argues, in the "Samson Complex," unable to
cope with the erosion of strength, professional success and sexual confidence.
In contrast to many women their age, who have achieved greater professional
success than they ever dreamed, many of these men are bitter at being pushed not
only down the ladder but off it altogether. Those who resolve these issues,
however, gallop on to alliterative happiness in the Serene Sixties, the Sage
Seventies, the Uninhibited Eighties and the Nobility of the Nineties, and may
even join the growing number of Celebratory Centenarians.

Ms. Sheehy is known for mannerisms of cuteness ("Let's replace 'aging' with
'sageing' " -- well, let's not), Capitalism (the Meaning Crisis, the Sexual
Diamond) and egotism (the census data confirm her findings, the experts she
interviews corroborate her theories -- not vice versa). And she does have a
weakness for popular psychology, such as the unverified notion that ancient
Goddess-worshiping cultures were more peaceful than God-worshiping ones, and for
"findings" reported in newspapers and popular books. (For example, her source
for the healing power of prayer is an article in The Seattle Times: "Prayer
Heals, Says Doctor.") But if you can forgive these lapses, or find them
charming, as many people do, you'll have a good time with this book. You will
find lots of people you know, and some of them might be yourself, the once and
future grown-up.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              324 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 846 words



International A2-7

A TEST OF DEMOCRACY IN HAITI

With delays, confusion and sporadic disruptions -- but little violence --
Haitians voted in an election that was an important test not only of Haiti's
incipient democracy, but of U.S. foreign policy and the United Nations.  A1

CLINTON AGAIN PONDERS VIETNAM

Twenty-six years after he agonized over avoiding service in the Vietnam War,
President Clinton is moving toward the end of an agonizing decision on granting
Vietnam diplomatic recognition.  A1

JOHN MAJOR'S BIG GAMBLE

News Analysis: Prime Minister John Major's call for a snap election on his
leadership of the Conservative Party may prove to be a very dangerous gamble.
A2

RUSSIA'S POPULAR PREMIER

Prime Minister Chernomyrdin had a good week, forcefully intervening to save the
lives of hundreds of Russians held by Chechen rebels, while President Yeltsin
seemed to be on the wrong side of events.  A3

ITALY HOLDS REPUTED MAFIA BOSS

Italian authorities have captured Leoluca Bagarella, the reputed leader of the
Mafia since the arrest in 1993 of his brother-in-law, Salvatore (Toto) Riina,
the presumed "boss of bosses." A3

QUEBEC TO CONSIDER NATIONHOOD

As the people of Quebec celebrate St. Jean-Baptiste Day, their "national"
holiday, they also face the second vote in 15 years on whether to split from
Canada.  A6

Reporter's Notebook: Geneva is awash in a new vernacular.  A2

Arab-Israeli violence flared in the West Bank and Gaza.  A6

Jerusalem Journal: Improving Israeli telephone manners.  A4

National A8-13, B10

A NEW USE FOR TITLE IX

Until recently, Title IX was widely perceived as a law guaranteeing women's
rights to participate in school athletics, but now it is being used in
harassment cases.  A1

AN OVERHAUL BY DEFAULT

News Analysis: With none of the drama that accompanied the President's failed
effort, Congress is embarking on major change in the health care system by
trimming Medicare and Medicaid.  A1

FINANCIAL WOES FOR N.R.A.

The leaders who took over the National Rifle Association four years ago have
allowed the organization to deteriorate into a deficit-plagued operation.  A1

HISTORY BEHIND PINK TRIANGLE

As the pink triangle was transformed from a mark of Nazi persecution into an
emblem of gay liberation, it lost its link to personal experience. Now the
symbol can be associated with one man's name.  A1

MCVEIGH GIVES INTERVIEW

In his first interview since he was charged with the Oklahoma bombing, Timothy
McVeigh told Newsweek magazine that he intended to plead not guilty to the
charges.  A8

SEEING PATTERN IN 10 KILLINGS

Some people in the Englewood neighborhood of Chicago wonder if police
indifference to the deaths of 10 women has masked the serial pattern of their
deaths.  A8

NEW REPORT ON IRAQ DOWNING

Two Army helicopters might have escaped being shot down over Iraq if their
pilots had received orders to switch to a different frequency, Time magazine
said.  A10

SYMPATHY IN NASA STING

The only person to demand a trial on charges from a Federal investigation into
bribery and kickbacks involving NASA contracts has won sympathy in Houston.  A11


VOTERS ARE DISENCHANTED

Residents of Tacoma, Wash., often a political barometer for the nation, are
again restless. In random interviews, they registered disappointment and
disenchantment over the state of politics.  A12

Metro Digest B1

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

Talk with president of PBS.  C11

Theater: Ntozake Shange's "Colored Girls." C11

Music: Ray Charles at JVC Jazz Festival.  C11

Mel Torme and Peggy Lee at Carnegie Hall.  C13

Jazz for a lazy afternoon.  C13

Joe Henderson at JVC. C13

Bands with Louisiana roots. C13

Caramoor opens.  C16

Bach in America. C16

Dance: Bussell and Kistler in 'A Midsummer Night's Dream." C12

Books: "Rose Madder," by Stephen King.  C16

Television: "Ballet," Wiseman's documentary, on PBS.  C14

Sports C1-9

Baseball: 4 in Row for Yanks.  C1

Mets hit bottom.  C7

Boxing: Garden wants Jones.  C9

Column: Anderson on Devils.  C3

Hockey: Devils' odyssey.  C1

Lemieux's redemption.  C2

Racing: A winning friendship.  C4

Soccer: U.S. wins U.S. Cup.  C9

Tennis: Sampras determined.  C4

Business Digest D1

Obituaries B6-8

WARREN BURGER DIES

Warren Burger, who served as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for 17 years
ending in 1986, died in Washington at age 87.  A1

James K. Batten, Knight-Ridder chairman.  B8

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Governor Pataki's watershed.

The United Nations at 50.

New York City's decrepit schools.

Letters

William Safire: Reading Bill's mind.

Anthony Lewis: The Italy we want?

Seymour Melman: Preparing for war (against ourselves).

T. J. English: Where crime rules.

Bridge C14

Chronicle B2

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              325 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CLINTON ON SPOT ON VIETNAM ISSUE

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1411 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 25


Twenty-six years after he agonized over avoiding service in a war he "opposed
and despised," President Clinton is moving toward the end of another agonizing
deliberation over Vietnam: how and when to grant the former enemy full
diplomatic recognition.

Most of Mr. Clinton's senior diplomatic, military, economic and political
advisers favor the move as the next step in a four-year-old process begun by the
Bush Administration, aimed at providing the fullest possible accounting for
Americans missing from the Vietnam War and at advancing United States business
interests in Southeast Asia.

Others, including the President, have hesitated, with Mr. Clinton said to feel
that his personal history leaves him imperfectly suited to be the kind of "Nixon
in China" figure with the hawkish bona fides to safely end a tortured chapter in
domestic American politics and diplomacy.

The political risks are clear enough for a President who wrote a quarter century
ago of his determination to "maintain my political viability within the system,"
while also avoiding military service short of overtly resisting the draft. But
in recent weeks, White House aides have increasingly concluded that if Mr.
Clinton does not move to normalize relations, his refusal will be interpreted as
political and purely personal, creating other risks.

In this view, the fire the President would surely take from conservatives or
veterans groups -- who do not support him in any event -- could be offset by
praise from others, including decorated war veterans like Senator John McCain,
Republican of Arizona, for taking a principled stand. These advisers point to
the quick dissipation of the flurry of criticism that greeted Mr. Clinton's
decision last year to lift the 19-year-old economic embargo against Vietnam.

"It's not 'if' anymore," a Presidential adviser said last week. "It's 'when.'
This is not something that will be done with any great joy, but something that
will be done because it's the right thing to do."

But in the Clinton White House, in particular, no decision is made until the
President makes it, and it remains to be seen how Mr. Clinton will go about
handling a final decision.

Secretary of State Warren Christopher has already formally recommended the move,
and Defense Secretary William J. Perry supports it; the qualms of the national
security adviser, Anthony Lake, were said to be lessening after a meeting of the
three last week.

Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown and many business executives have also
strongly urged the move, arguing that it is the best way to insure American
access to emerging markets in Southeast Asia. At least two of the President's
longest-serving political advisers also favor the move.

On the other side are some family groups of those missing in action, and a
virtual cottage industry of searchers who send missions to Vietnam and lobby for
continued Government support in what Congressional critics view as a cynical and
self-justifying exploitation of Americans' grief.

A vocal minority of veterans remain traumatized by the war and heavily invested
in refighting it by questing after survivors or indulging in Rambo-esque flights
of imagined revenge. But one Congressional aide who has worked on the issue for
five years said it was an insult to the honor of the vast majority of veterans
to suggest that they could not accept Washington's decision to move on.

Those who advocate recognition want Mr. Clinton to announce it by next month,
and not wait until the Presidential campaign season gets any closer. There is
some time pressure because Mr. Christopher is to attend a conference next month
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, known as Asean, at which Vietnam
is to join the group, and Administration officials would like to have the matter
settled by then.

At the same time, just after the Fourth of July Congressional recess, the Senate
is expected to take up the State Department's budget authorization, and as part
of that debate, two conflicting measures on Vietnam are to be offered. One is a
resolution, sponsored by Mr. McCain and two other veterans, John Kerry of
Massachusetts and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, both Democrats, urging recognition.
The other, sponsored by Republican Senators Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire and
Bob Dole of Kansas, the majority leader, would withhold financing for any
American Embassy in Vietnam.

Some advisers have suggested that the President wait for Mr. McCain's
resolution, which is favored to pass, while others are urging that he get ahead
of the issue by acting first, with Mr. McCain, who spent five years as a
prisoner of war in Vietnam and went to the White House three weeks ago to urge
recognition, by his side.

"I have long hoped that's what he'll do," Mr. McCain said in a telephone
interview on Friday. "I told him I'd be more than glad to stand next to him
while he makes the announcement."

Asked what he thought was holding up a decision, Mr. McCain said, "You know,
this Administration is sometimes hard to decipher," but then quickly apologized:
"That's kind of a cheap shot. I'm sure given his history, it's a very sensitive
decision."

Mr. McCain, who supports normalization as the best way to provide a final
accounting of Americans missing from the war, said that in their White House
meeting, Mr. Clinton had not tipped his hand. The Senator also said he believed
that normalization was the surest way to aid Vietnamese political reforms, and
protect American security interests in the region by fostering a strong and
economically stable Vietnam.

"His demeanor was one of wanting to be sure he had all the facts," Mr. McCain
said. "I didn't sense either eagerness or reluctance. He just seemed to want to
get the facts."

Veterans' groups are divided. The national commander in chief of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars, Allen F.  Kent, a Marine Corps veteran of Vietnam, issued a
statement this month saying: "If by normalizing relations with Vietnam we can
further the process leading towards the fullest possible accounting, then the
V.F.W. will support such a decision. If progress does not continue, we will
demand the President and Congress withdraw our Ambassador and close the
embassy."

But the American Legion's national commander, William M. Detweiler, wrote the
President this month urging him "in the strongest possible terms," not to
normalize relations. Mr. Detweiler said "only very minimal progress" had been
made in the four main areas cited by Mr. Clinton in 1993 in determining the
timetable for recognition.

Those areas are return of human remains, return of documents, field searches and
investigations of M.I.A. cases jointly with Laos. Mr. Detweiler wrote, "The
continual dribbling out of selected reports to American delegations clearly
shows that Hanoi will only release information when doing so suits its own
purpose."

Mr. Clinton, in remarks on Memorial Day while unveiling a new postage stamp
commemorating P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s, spoke warmly of Hanoi's efforts, saying it
was providing more cooperation "than ever before" and praising the overall
effort to account for those missing in Vietnam. "There is nothing like it in all
the history of warfare," Mr. Clinton said.

But groups representing families of the missing have complained that even the
most recently released batch of about 150 documents supplied to an American
delegation by the Vietnamese this spring does not amount to much, and the
Pentagon's P.O.W./M.I.A. office acknowledged that the papers would not
immediately resolve any outstanding cases.

Senator McCain noted that the United States spends about $100 million a year on
efforts to account for the missing, and that there remain only 55 cases that
offer even the slightest hope that the servicemen in question did not die at the
moment of their initial loss and that might yet be resolved through cooperation
with the Vietnamese.

Senator Kerrey, who lost a leg in Vietnam, said he supported Mr. Christopher's
recommendation "as the best means to achieve to goal for which we went there a
quarter century ago: the freedom of the Vietnamese people."

"We must return there, heads held high, and say proudly that we fought for the
freedom of the Vietnamese people then and will continue to fight for it until it
is achieved," Mr. Kerrey said in a statement. "Freedom is the best vehicle for
promoting solid relations, both diplomatic and economic, between our peoples."

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              326 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In a New Era for Vietnam, a Church Is Reborn

SECTION: Section A;   Page 7;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Catholics from a parish near Hanoi marched to celebrate the
reopening of their church, which was destroyed in the American "Christmas
bombing" of the north in 1972. Vietnam's Communist Government has been carrying
out political and social reforms, including more religious tolerance.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              327 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Appearing Nightly: Robert Dornan, Master of the Put-Down

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A;   Page 14;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1447 words

DATELINE: TYSONS CORNER, Va.


As the Republican presidential candidates trek America's political stage,
Representative Robert K. Dornan, far back in the pack, stands out as the lounge
act of the show. He is the warm-up man and put-down artist tart as Don Rickles,
skewering President Clinton as a "draft-dodging adulterer" leading the nation's
"cultural meltdown" that a Dornan presidency must reverse.

"I am the one inside the Beltway listening to the screams of the Christians when
the lions roar," the Californian Congressman booms in a deep, rough-edged voice
that invariably draws cheers from conservative faithful like the Virginia
Republicans who gave him a standing ovation last weekend. Even so, their straw
poll was delivered solidly to the conservative columnist Patrick J. Buchanan,
much as they loved Mr. Dornan's spleenful warm-up act with its warnings against
abortion and "pro-active" homosexuality.

He has perfected it across nine terms in Congress in which the aggressiveness of
his oratory, flashing lethal and crude as a linoleum knife, has seen him banned
from the floor for a day by angry colleagues. He apologizes to none of them,
least of all a homosexual Congressman whom he outed on the House floor as having
a "revolving door on his closet."

As a politician, Mr. Dornan's forte is pungent speech, what he terms "the
courage to be flamboyant." President Clinton may be calling for a new politics
of civility, but Mr. Dornan, a master of talk-radio invective, is uninhibitedly
calling him "a sleazeball who can't keep his pants on."

He once campaigned against a female primary challenger by warning, "Every
lesbian spear-chucker in this country is hoping I get defeated." Amid a dozen
firebrand remarks that score a career of political lambasting, Mr. Dornan
apologizes for none of his goadings but one -- a House speech in which he
denounced Vladimir Posner, the former Soviet propagandist, as a "betraying
little Jew."

"That's the only thing in my life I ever lost sleep over," said the Congressman.
He insists, he meant to say "Judas," not "Jew," in rebutting the insistence of
Mr. Posner that the Soviet Union was free of anti-Semitism.

For this, he ever winces and points to a big Israeli air force belt buckle that
he wears like a hair shirt cincture. "I've never been on the House floor that I
don't have my Star of David," says the 62-year-old Air Force veteran.

Amid the occasional crash landings of his speechifying, Mr. Dornan is resilient.
Orange County Democrats discovered this in last year's Congressional race when
they sought to attack him as a moralizing hypocrite who talks family values but
was accused of physical abuse by his wife 35 years ago in divorce proceedings
that she later dropped. He won re-election easily despite Democratic mailers
asking, "Would you vote for a man who beats his wife?"

The airing of this issue along the Presidential trail shows Mr. Dornan at his
counter-punching best. First, he notes that his wife, Sallie, who subsequently
admitted to emotional instability because of prescription drug addiction and a
"dysfunctional" family upbringing, was still at his side as devoted spouse and
strategist. Then, the Congressman lists the other divorced and remarried
candidates, virtually the entire field, and declares with a big smile: "Excuse
me, you're talking about something 35 years ago and, hey, I'm the one married 40
years."

Democrats dismiss him as a practiced "clown" with a nasty mouth. "Right job,
wrong planet," says Representative Barney Frank, a gay Massachusetts Democrat
wary of his colleague's virulence and "lucid incoherence" in rapid-fire
orations. The Congressman whom Mr. Dornan outed on the House floor, Steve
Gunderson, a Wisconsin Republican, declines to discuss the incident. Mr. Frank
says it was a particularly cruel moment, but Mr. Dornan says it was defensible
because he decided Mr. Gunderson was being quietly "pro-active" about
homosexuality in discussing legislation.

President Clinton, denounced by Mr. Dornan as having given "aid and comfort to
the enemy" during the Vietnam war, responded that the man needs an anti-rabies
shot. The Congressman delights in his own campaign-trail riposte: "If he wants
to get into veterinarian metaphors he should have been spayed, fixed when he was
a young man and maybe he'd get a second term as President."

"I get under their skin," the Congressman says with a smile of satisfaction
about the Clintons. "I know because the Secret Service guys tell me."

Other also-rans may well fade by spring, but voters can expect to hear Mr.
Dornan still on the Clinton attack well into 1996, carrying the personal issue
that larger contenders find risky. "With a vengeance, whether I'm still a
candidate or not," Mr. Dornan confirms, deepening his voice with the polish of a
talk-radio and television performer.

Indeed, he got to Washington two decades before the current crop of broadcast
polemicists starting producing their own candidates.

As a candidate, Mr. Dornan, who is legendary as a House fund raiser in
direct-mail small amounts rather than large PAC donations, admits to
difficulties on the Presidential circuit. Aiming to have $500,000 by now, he has
less than half that and has raised the required $5,000 minimum in only 7 of the
20 states required for matching Federal money in January.

"Bob Dole's lapping the field but his car may hit the wall," Mr. Dornan barks
with typical flippancy.

Asked for his Presidential plans, he begins, "I would make my White House closer
to Andy Jackson without the bravado and the booze, to John F. Kennedy without
squandering precious hours chasing women." He goes on from there, displaying a
detail-crammed memory of history and Presidencies. "I would be an exciting
President."

Moments later, he can be touching, as when he tells the story of his mother, a
red-haired Ziegfield Follies showgirl who was maimed in a car accident. She
became a reclusive insomniac devoted to reading political biographies and
remains an enormous inspiration for Mr. Dornan 28 years after her death.

"She was gorgeous and she was smart," says the Congressman, who was a movie
extra as a young man, encouraged by his uncle, Jack Haley, who played the Tin
Man in "Wizard of Oz."

His fans say the news media have trivialized him, but others disagree. "Bob's a
willing participant in the image he takes such pleasure in," says Gov. Thomas R.
Carper of Delaware, a Democrat who served 10 years in the House and considers
Mr. Dornan a friend though they disagreed on basic issues. "He's a patriot,
loves our country, and he has a sense of humor about himself," the Governor
said, relating a spontaneous family-values joke last April when Mr. Dornan
suddenly arrived in Delaware by train to announce his candidacy.

The Governor, who happened to be rehearsing a political lampoon show and was
wearing women's clothes, rushed to the station platform. He packed padding under
his skirt to look pregnant and printed a sign that proclaimed: "Dornan's the
One." The candidate was shrewd enough to not get off the train, staring warily
from a window, so the Governor went aboard.

His high point lately is the House's approval of a rollback of President
Clinton's executive order that permits abortions at overseas military hospitals.
Opposition to abortion is the congressman's keystone in his "cultural meltdown"
campaign philippic that ranges to some of the tiniest aspects of Government.

He becomes furious at any equating of the gay rights campaign with the civil
rights protests that he marched in as a supporter of the Rev. Martin Luther King
Jr. "The road to Selma was not the road to Sodom," he says sternly.

"Homophobia?" he asks in an interview. "I'm not afraid of homosexuals. I love
them. Jesus commanded me to love them, just as I love people with a lot of other
problems." The gay world, he adds, is not foreign to him. "Remember I grew up in
New York and Beverley Hills," he says darkly, telling of being regularly
harassed while hitchhiking to his Jesuit high school in West Los Angeles. "Oh,
I've been hit on," he says. "And always the same ridiculous line: 'Boy you have
nice thighs.' "

Searching for his defining moment, candidate Dornan is the garrulous drummer
peddling his best notions ("Faith, Family and Freedom"). His family runs his
campaign in clan gatherings free of professionals. "We all know hired
consultants can't really tell slime from shinola," he says in blade-sharp
dismissal of the larger politics he is up against.

"I pretty well know what's going to happen," he suddenly says, promising his
message will be heard if he has to go down fighting, which is to say, talking
outrageously.

NAME: Robert K. Dornan

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wearing rubber gloves, protesters raised their hands as
Representative Robert K. Dornan of California testified last week on the Clinton
Administration's AIDS training program. The protesters were upset because White
House security officers had worn rubber gloves the previous week while searching
men and women as they entered the White House for a conference on AIDS issues.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              328 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Downward Spiral of Troubled Life;
Behind a Bloody Trail: Reform School, Prison and Drugs

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section B;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1698 words

DATELINE: ATLANTIC CITY, June 23


In recent months, people around Darnell Collins would gauge his mood by looking
at his eyes.

If he was not on cocaine or heroin, they were a gentle brown, but when he was
high, they grew large, darkened a shade and by all accounts filled with a venom,
seeming to suck all the air from the room. In the weeks before Mr. Collins began
what the authorities are calling a cocaine-laced murder spree that left his
girlfriend, April Gates, dead along with six others in New Jersey and Manhattan,
that look made Miss Gates shake.

"Just the look, the malice she would see in his face, scared her," said a
neighbor, Jenny M. Williams, 71.

There was the time he appeared suddenly at the blackjack table in the Trump
Castle Casino, where Miss Gates was a dealer. "One day he was standing there
looking at her, and she dropped the cards," recalled Sharon S. Johnson, 39,
another neighbor. "She would say: 'I know he is going to kill me. I know it. I
can just feel it.' He was cruel. He was mean."

That day at the casino, Miss Gates frantically clapped her hands, signaling the
pit boss that something was wrong at her table. The security force hustled Mr.
Collins out, back onto the streets of Atlantic City.

Mr. Collins wandered those streets endlessly, and by walking there now,
interviewing the friends and relatives he bumped into, a picture emerges of a
man shaped and ultimately twisted on this casino town's poor streets, a man
increasingly capable in recent weeks of a sudden, violent rage. When he was
clean, he had the laid-back surface temperament that fits in a beach town, but
inside always was what the one uncle who agreed to talk called "anger,
resentment and fear."

It started early and only got worse, first in reform school, beginning at age 9,
then during a decade in prison, and finally back in Atlantic City. He made an
effort to change after his release last year, but ultimately, the police said,
Mr. Collins, 33, stalked Miss Gates, 30, with a growing fury that drove him to
slay her, her mother and his drug dealer in New Jersey and four victims at
random in Manhattan before he was fatally shot by the local police in Nutley,
N.J., on June 21.

There is something cruel about Atlantic City in the way the burned out, boarded
up streets lead right to the limousine-clogged entrances of the oceanfront
casinos, drawing a sharp divide between haves and have nots. The scent of the
ocean never seems to get past the towers; the sea gulls squawking over bits of
garbage are the main reminder of the beach on the poor streets.

Drug sales form one of the few crossroads between the two worlds. They can be
glimpsed near the triangular park where Bacharach Boulevard intersects Kentucky
Avenue. Between swigging or shooting up, the park regulars roll dice against the
concrete benches. Someone will break off and head for a public phone, sliding in
a packet just as the buyer steps by to retrieve it. The park was Mr. Collins's
main haunt.

"It's nothing but a gambling town and a drug town," said Robert L. Black, 31, a
childhood friend. "The only way to do good in Atlantic City is to leave, or to
get some kind of religion and mean it."

Mr. Collins did neither. In prison, he adopted a Muslim name, Mwanza Kamau, but
nobody, including his uncle, a practicing Muslim, saw signs of any real faith.

People are shocked by what he is accused of doing because he seemed so average.
But he established a wilder pattern than his peers early on.

"He had no balance," said his uncle, who is 33. Most relatives -- a half brother
in Harlem, his mother and cousins here -- said they were too sad and upset to
talk, or they slammed the door on a reporter. The few relatives who would talk
about him insisted that their names not be used. "He had no father, no religion,
nothing to believe in," said the uncle. "It left him with no other answer but
being on the streets, doing the only thing that he knew how to do."

Born in New York City on April 5, 1962, he was brought back to his mother's
hometown by her after his father, a paratrooper, was killed in the Vietnam War,
the uncle said.

Mr. Collins's prison records show that at age 9 he was sent to reform school for
assault, shoplifting, larceny, attempted arson, trespassing and what the
authorities called overall incorrigibility. No one would say how long he was
there for, but at age 13 he was sent to the Jamesbury Correctional Facility -- a
jail for minors -- for assault. Friends think he robbed someone on the street.

He was arrested six or seven times for things like car thefts, obtaining money
under false pretenses, robbery and assault. Then in 1984, he was arrested for
holding up an Atlantic City candy store with a cap gun.

He got 15 years in prison on charges of robbery, aggravated assault and
violation of probation, said Robert M. Egles, the executive director of the
State Parole Board. In 1990, he got seven more years for stabbing a fellow
inmate at Rahway State Prison.

Mark Cotton, a 23-year-old barber, said Mr. Collins bragged that he had stabbed
someone 23 times with a sharpened toothbrush in the shower, keeping notes on how
it went in "an assassination book."

His prison discipline record was so bad that he was denied parole in December
1988, in October 1989 and again in November 1992. Finally, after 11 months of
good behavior, the Parole Board released him on Jan. 11, 1994.

He went to prison in his early 20's with a big head of curly hair and came out
in his early 30's, with his black hair short, a trim goatee, and his
5-foot-8-inch frame at a muscular 170 pounds. People think those 10 years
transformed him from a troubled youth into a man with a pronounced violent edge.
He never quite regained his footing when he got out.

"I think that is what made him what he eventually turned out to be," said Wally
Mouconquist, 38, a park regular. "When he came out, he wasn't the same kid."

Those who saw him around said that like many prisoners, Mr. Collins came out
determined to stay out. He would get a job, spend time with his two sons, get a
life. It went well at first. He had a quiet, easygoing nature and had always
been comfortable with women.

"He was a good dancer," Mr. Black said. "He was a girl's man. He was
light-skinned."

Mr. Collins got and lost a series of minimum-wage jobs, typically dismissed
after a few weeks when employers learned of his prison record, friends and
relatives said. He set up a curbside table to sell incense and posters, bought
collages of Nelson Mandela and maps of Africa wholesale in New York City and
sold them for $10 to $30 each. He could be generous. Most friends still have one
or two hanging on their apartment walls.

He was gregarious, pulling up to the curb on his bicycle to chat or dropping by
his mother's rickety, three-story house on Virginia Avenue to sit on the tilting
first-floor wooden porch under a shade tree. An elderly relative recovering from
a stroke sat on a white plastic chair there the other day, shooing strangers
away from his mother, secluded inside.

"Whenever he came here, it was a hug and a kiss and hello grandma, even though
he knew I was his cousin," said the woman.

Sometime in the early summer of 1994, he met Miss Gates. It looked like love.
She invited him to move into the little white house she shared with her mother
and 7-year-old son, Trey.

"He was cute, and when she first met him, he wasn't getting high," said Alicia
T. Chappell, the friend who has told the police that she watched as he shot Miss
Gates three times point blank.

Friends and relatives said that he started selling drugs late last summer and
that it was only a matter of time before he began sampling. In September, a
parole board drug test showed he had used marijuana, and he spent two weeks in
the Atlantic County Jail.

That started the downward spiral, friends said. Miss Gates was his only mooring,
they say, and as drugs undermined their relationship and she pulled away, he
could not take another rejection.

His capricious mean streak erupted on drugs. One minute, he seemed too spaced
out to recognize anyone; the next, he was clubbing or pistol-whipping whoever
was handy. His anger with Miss Gates blew out of control on Feb. 14, when he
smashed the windows on her new gold metallic Saturn, according to a restraining
order she obtained.

Friends said he begged forgiveness and Miss Gates dismissed the February
complaint. Peace didn't last because she did not want him back in the house. He
stopped going to New York to get posters, living and dealing off handouts from
friends or Miss Gates. "She was in love with him," Ms. Chappell said. "She was
hoping that he would change."

He was rootless in his hometown. One 23-year-old relative who took him in asked
him to leave after two weeks, afraid he would harm her three children. He talked
about rehabilitation programs but never went.

"April was a pretty girl," Mr. Black said. "He was strung out over her. I guess
he figured if he can't have her, nobody could."

He started threatening to kill Miss Gates, friends said. He smashed the windows
of her house. He would hit her or hold a gun to her head. Friends said he would
tell her it was only a matter of time before he got her. Ms. Chappell said he
spread a rumor that Miss Gates had AIDS so that no one else would take her out.

"He was nutty," Ms. Chappell said. "He would think everybody was plotting behind
his back."

On June 5, Miss Gates filed another restraining order. He ripped it up in her
face. Two days before her murder, when he showed up at a relative's house to
wait for her, she ran away, so he turned on the relative.

"He had one hand around my throat and a knife in his other hand," said a
23-year-old relative. "He was yelling at me that I was trying to break them up.
My boyfriend had to get him off." The relative got her own restraining order.

On Friday night, June 16, hours before the killing began, Mr. Collins smoked or
injected a quarter ounce of cocaine, friends said. "One person can't do that
much -- it's too much," Mr. Black said. "You want more, more and more, and I'm
sure at some point he said to hell with it, I'm going to go all out."

NAME: Darnell Collins

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The park off Bacharach Boulevard, which was one of the haunts
of Darnell Collins, who the authorities say went on a drug-laced murder spree.
Drug transactions are said to be made around the Atlantic City park. (Norman Y.
Lono for The New York Times)(pg. B4); The Baltic Avenue building in Atlantic
City where Darnell Collins lived. The police say he killed seven people on a
rampage in New Jersey and New York. (Norman Y. Lono for The New York Times);
Darnell Collins (Associated Press)(pg. B1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              329 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Richard Conners, 85, Legislator Called 'Dean of the Assembly'

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section D;   Page 21;   Column 4;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 396 words


Richard J. Conners, who spent 50 years in political office in Albany, most
recently in the New York State Assembly, died on Sunday at a nursing home in
Cohoes, N.Y. He was 85 and a lifelong resident of Albany.

The cause was pneumonia, his family said.

Mr. Conners's life, private and political, centered on Albany's North End,
specifically the Irish-American neighborhood around Sacred Heart Church. He was
easily elected to eight two-year terms in the Assembly, concerning himself with
veterans' affairs and the elderly.

Because of his age and courtly demeanor, he was often referred to as the "dean
of the Assembly." In 1983, he became chairman of the newly formed veterans'
affairs committee and was a member of committees dealing with real-property
taxation, the cities, insurance and the development of tourism, arts and sports.

He started his legislative career as an alderman on the Albany City Council in
1942, the same year Erastus Corning 2d began his 40-year reign as Mayor of
Albany. He represented the same ward his father, Michael F. Conners, had
represented in the council in the 1880's.

After 20 years as an alderman, he was elected Council President, a post he held
for 16 years until his election to the Assembly from the 104th District. He was
the principal sponsor of legislation to extend the statute of limitations for
Vietnam veterans claiming health problems linked to Agent Orange. In accordance
with his strong religious beliefs, he opposed both the death penalty and
abortion.

He announced in 1992 that he would not seek a ninth term. At the time, his home
was being redrawn out of his district by fellow Democrats who wanted him out of
office because of advancing age and health problems. But he was mentor to his
successor and the incumbent, John J. McEneny, who was his chief of staff and
campaign manager.

Mr. Conners was educated at Christian Brothers Academy and Albany Business
College and headed the insurance brokerage firm founded by his father in 1895.

He is survived by three daughters, Mary Alice Morgan of Loudonville, N.Y.,
Margaret Harrigan of Albany, and Maureen C. Moriarity of Pebble Beach, Calif.; a
son, Michael F. 2d, an Albany County legislator from the North End who is
running for county comptroller, eight grandchildren and one great-grandchild.
His wife of 50 years, Margaret Egan Conners, died in 1986.

NAME: Richard J. Conners

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard J. Conners (David Jennings, 1984)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              330 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Dust Off the SEATO Charter

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The foreign policy establishment is currently wrapped up in a mind-numbing
debate about whether NATO should be enlarged. But if you think about it, the
more urgent question for American foreign policy is whether SEATO should be
revived.

Yes, you remember SEATO -- the "Southeast Asia Treaty Organization." Formed in
1954 by the Philippines, Thailand, Pakistan, Australia, New Zealand, Britain,
France and the U.S., it aimed to deter China and the spread of Communism in
Asia. SEATO was terminated in 1977, after the Vietnam war, leaving no trace
outside of trivia quiz shows.

Of course, the old SEATO is not likely to rise from the ashes anytime soon, but
think about this: The chances of the Russian military invading Eastern Europe
today are virtually nil. Today's Russia has neither the intentions, nor, if
Chechnya is any guide, the capabilities to threaten Eastern Europe. That is why
we have the luxury of endlessly debating NATO enlargement. It can wait.

That is simply not the case anymore in Asia. There, a rapidly growing China
increasingly has the capabilities, and some would argue the intentions, to
expand aggressively into the South China Sea, to seize the oil-laden Spratly
Islands and to more generally intimidate all its neighbors. Unlike Europe, where
you at least have a core NATO alliance of 16 countries in place, Asia is a
strategic no man's land. There is no formal security structure there, and the ad
hoc balancing arrangements, involving the U.S., Japan, Korea and Russia, are
just that -- ad hoc and uncertain, held together with Band-Aids and baling wire.

How long will this ad hoc structure be able to maintain a strategic balance with
1.2 billion Chinese, whose economy is growing at 10 percent per annum, whose
work force adds 60 million job-seekers each year and whose huge army is steadily
modernizing?

The optimists argue that the Chinese military, while improving, still has very
little ability to project power far beyond its borders. It has no aircraft
carriers, only a few old submarines and no aerial refueling capabilities. But
when you have 3.2 million men under arms, you can be the Salvation Army and
still intimidate your neighbors.

The pessimists argue that China has consistently lied about its defense budgets
and strategic thinking. That makes its neighbors nervous, particularly when both
the U.S. and Japan are slowing their defense spending and China is speeding its
military modernization -- not to mention bullying Hong Kong, brazenly testing
more nuclear weapons and beefing up its toeholds in the Spratly Islands, which
are claimed by five other nations.

Senior U.S. officials say that this behavior has increasingly prompted some of
China's neighbors to ask Washington whether the best policy in the coming decade
is to engage China or formally try to contain it. The obsessive focus on NATO
expansion has obscured this behind-the-scenes discussion.

At this stage, any formal containment of China would be premature. SEATO's
resurrection can wait. Declaring Beijing the enemy now would only become a
self-fulfilling prophecy. It may be inevitable, but as long as there is still a
chance for shaping a benign China, the stakes are too big not to try.

The U.S. and its Asian allies need to stick with a combination of engagement and
hidden containment. That means halting the shrinkage of the U.S. naval and army
presence in Asia and establishing full diplomatic relations with Vietnam -- now
-- because as China's historical enemy, Hanoi is one of the strongest
counterweights to Beijing. It means getting Japan to understand that if it
continues its unfair trade practices, it will corrode the strategic axis between
Washington and Tokyo that is central to balancing China. And it also means
conducting a sustained, high-level dialogue with China's leaders, and continuing
to rope them into regional associations, like the APEC economic forum, in the
hopes of taming their bullying instincts through interdependence.

It's the Woody Allen solution. His famous quip that "80 percent of success is
showing up" is true in geopolitics as well. For now, formally trying to contain
China would be a mistake. But we can keep showing up -- militarily, economically
and diplomatically -- drawing red lines for China wherever necessary, building
bridges wherever possible. And dusting off that SEATO charter just in case.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              331 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
Will Presidents miss a few economic aides? Some say yes.

BYLINE: By Peter Passell

SECTION: Section D;   Page 2;   Column 1;   Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


WHEN the President wants economic advice, he can always turn to his National
Economic Council, the Office of Management and Budget or the Cabinet agencies.
So why not jettison the Council of Economic Advisers, a 48-year-old symbol of an
era when economists had the hubris to believe they could smooth the way to
permanent prosperity?

Such reasoning, spiced with more than a dash of partisanship, apparently
explains the House Republicans' inclination to deny funds for the council. But
in the view of conservative as well as liberal economists, it represents myopia
with a capital M. "It would be a pity to throw away a bargain," argues Martin S.
Feldstein, chairman of the council under President Ronald Reagan.

As Federal agencies go, the council, with a professional staff of 27 and a
payroll of less than $4 million, barely rates an asterisk in the
trillion-dollar-plus Federal budget. Still, it seemed a plausible enough target
for Republicans determined to match cuts in Congressional staff with trims in
executive branch operations.

The Clinton Administration attacked the Republican effort again yesterday as it
named a new chairman to the council, Joseph E. Stiglitz, who replaces Laura
D'Andrea Tyson. Still, Republicans on a House Appropriations subcommittee voted
yesterday to eliminate the council.

If the Republicans succeed, the Republic will no doubt survive. For one thing,
the once-primary role of the council in balancing the risks of recession and
inflation has fallen to the keepers of the money supply at the Federal Reserve:
The ability to use tax and spending policy to fine-tune economic growth has
withered in an era of $200 billion-plus budget deficits. And in any event, the
President would still be able to staff the White House with professional
economists.

But Mr. Feldstein, now the head of the National Bureau of Economic Research,
thinks much would be lost in downgrading the job. "The council has built a
remarkable reputation," he said. "There's just no way you could recruit
comparably qualified economists" without the nameplate on the office door.

Michael J. Boskin, the council chairman under President George Bush,
acknowledges that the Cabinet agencies employ some fine economists. But council
economists, largely recruited from academia, "bring a fresh look," he argues,
"one free of institutional bias." You need outsiders, he suggests, to settle
differences between, say, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Energy
Department.

Then, too, even the most ambitious members of the council tend to be economists
first and politicians second. For while partisanship sometimes colors their
public pronouncements, most council members understand they will not be in
government for long. "They are under pressure from the profession to retain
their intellectual independence," says James Tobin, a member of the council in
the Kennedy White House.

The benefits of this intellectual independence are not hard to find. In 1961 Mr.
Tobin convinced a skeptical President John F. Kennedy of the virtues of tax
incentives for business investment. In 1967 Arthur M. Okun tried to persuade
President Lyndon B. Johnson to pay for the Vietnam War with a tax increase -- a
policy shift that would likely have contained the inflationary fires to come.
And in 1982, Mr. Feldstein fought the good fight against slashing taxes before
taking on government spending.

By the same token, council economists, liberal and conservative, have manned the
battlements against ill-justified interference with free markets. Council
economists under President Reagan held back the tide of trade protectionism. In
1990 the council fought for market-based incentives to cut the cost of
containing acid rain. In 1993, Ms. Tyson warned the White House of the striking
similarities between the organization of the Clinton health care bureaucracy and
the Bulgarian ministry of farm machinery and shoe polish.

A less appreciated benefit of the council has been to raise the quality of
policy economics. A discipline that accords its highest honors to theorists or
ideologues and disdains hands-on experience would have much less of value to
say, for example, about ways to contain inflation or the pros and cons of
deregulating the electric power industry. "Just compare American economists to
their European counterparts," suggests Richard L. Schmalensee, a former council
member who now teaches at M.I.T.

The council has been on the endangered species list before. After Mr. Feldstein
went public with his critique of voodoo economics, the Reagan White House vowed
to rid itself of apostates. But that wound was self-inflicted. Congress is now
threatening to deprive future Presidents of easy access to top-rank economic
analysis. And, in the words of Mr. Schmalensee, merely "to save the cost of the
radio on one stealth bomber."


LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              332 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Split by Immigration Law, Couple Seeks a Solution

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section D;     Page 20;     Column 1;     National Desk;     Law Page

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, June 29


When arrows flew from Cupid's bow, obviously none fell even near the United
States Immigration and Naturalization Service headquarters on I Street in
Washington.

An immigration law relating to draft dodgers in World War I is forcing a
Canadian man and his American wife to live apart.

That is not what the law intended, immigration experts agree, and many
immigration service officials and American diplomats are sympathetic to the
couple. Yet no one has found a way out of the imbroglio.

The Canadian, Gerald Carriere, enlisted in the United States Marines in 1963 and
is a veteran of the Vietnam War. His wife, Sandy, lives on a 25-acre ranch in
eastern Indiana. They desperately want to live together in Indiana, but a
section of immigration law is preventing that.

He was not denied a permanent-resident visa for the usual reasons, like a
criminal record, health problems, involvement in genocide, or practicing
polygamy or terrorism. Instead, the reason was his early discharge from the
Marines, 10 months before his four-year enlistment was up.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Carriere work for the Monsanto Company as chemical
firefighters. They met at a school for firefighters in Texas, and since their
marriage in 1993, they have spent thousands of dollars on telephone and airline
bills to stay in touch, managing to meet only every 10 to 12 weeks.

"I find the bureaucracy that we're going through absolutely disgusting," said
Mrs. Carriere, 46, from Sunman, Ind. From Montreal, Mr. Carriere, 54, said, "How
I really feel you couldn't print."

Mr. Carriere has been denied a visa to become a permanent resident of the United
States. He needs it for his green card, which would enable him to work in the
United States and eventually become a citizen. He can enter the United States
any time he wants, but he can stay for only six months, and he can not work.

To obtain the early discharge from the Marines, which Mr. Carriere sought to be
with his wife at that time, he had to cite his "alien status." He did not know
that a provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act, Section 315, says that
a person is ineligible for American citizenship if released from military duty
because of alien status. And a person not eligible for citizenship, according to
Section 212 A8 of the same act, is ineligible for immigration.

Although spouses of American citizens are usually on a fast track to
citizenship, the American Consulate in Montreal, while sympathetic to Mr.
Carriere, reluctantly denied him a visa and urged the couple to retain a lawyer.

The Immigration and Nationality Act was conceived in World War I when thousands
of new immigrants used their alien status to stay out of the Army. Congress's
rationale in passing the act was that people unwilling to fight for the United
States should not be allowed to enjoy its benefits.

But the Carrieres' lawyer, Drew S. Diehl of the McKinney & Namei Company, a
Cincinnati firm, said that some American lawmakers and legal scholars were
convinced that Congress never envisaged the law as barring citizenship to
someone like Mr. Carriere, who volunteered for the United States military.

Ten of Mr. Carriere's 38 months in the Marines were spent aboard the aircraft
carrier Independence off Vietnam. He won a personal-commendation letter from the
ship's captain, as well as a unit commendation, is eligible for the Vietnam
Service Medal and obtained an honorable discharge. The Vietnam Veterans of
America and Veterans of Foreign Wars have petitioned the Government on his
behalf.

Near the end of his third year of service, Mr. Carriere married a Canadian who
urged him to quit the Marines to be with her. He resisted, saying he wanted to
make the Marine Corps his career. But his wife's persistence led him to relent,
he said in an interview, and seek an early discharge. The couple returned to
Canada, but soon divorced.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton, the Indiana Democrat who is the ranking minority
member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said Mr. Carriere's exclusion
from the United States was unfair. Mr. Hamilton, in whose district Mrs. Carriere
lives, has introduced a bill applying specifically to Mr. Carriere; it would
exempt him from the provisions of Section 315.

But Mr. Hamilton acknowledged that his bill's chances for passage were slim.
"Congress doesn't usually take easily to private bills," he said.

"We usually have hundreds, if not thousands, introduced each year, and very few
pass."

Mr. Hamilton said that he first considered trying to change the law, but added,
"That's not likely, given the mood of the Congress and the country."

Mr. Hamilton said he had been in touch with the Clinton Administration,
including Vice President Gore's office. "I've been in touch with everyone on
this," he said.

An interpretation of Section 315 that appears to be gaining ground in the
immigration service as a result of the Carriere case is that the exclusion from
citizenship does not apply to aliens who were not liable for American military
service under Selective Service laws. Since Mr. Carriere came to the United
States expressly to join the Marines and was not subject to the draft, he would
be exempt.

A 1950 Supreme Court decision, McGrath v. Kristensen, supports this
interpretation, said both the Carrieres' lawyer, Mr. Diehl, and Stanley Mailman,
an expert on immigration law and a partner of Satterlee, Stephens, Burke & Burke
in New York City. That case involved a Danish citizen who entered the United
States as a visitor in 1939 and was prevented from returning to Denmark by World
War II. As an alien, he refused the draft.

The Supreme Court held that since he could not return home, he was not
technically an American resident liable for military service and was thus
eligible for naturalization.

The "best hope" for the Carrieres, Mr. Hamilton said, is the adoption of this
interpretation of the law by the immigration service's Office of General Counsel
in Washington. The State Department says it will not act on Mr. Carriere's visa
request without an advisory opinion from the general counsel's office.

A spokesman for the immigration service, Ray Dudley, said that the case was
being reviewed and that the review should be completed "in a short matter of
time."

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An immigration law on World War I draft dodgers is forcing a
Canadian and his American wife of two years to live apart. The Canadian, Gerald
Carriere, lives in an apartment in Montreal, and his wife, Sandy, in a house in
Sunman, Ind. "How I really feel you couldn't print," Mr. Carriere said. ( Mark
Lyons for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              333 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
'Apollo 13,' a Movie for the Fourth of July

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;     Page 1;     Column 1;     Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1321 words


THE line of dialogue that will be best remembered from Ron Howard's absolutely
thrilling new "Apollo 13" is a slight variation on the truth. "Houston, we have
a problem," says one of this film's three endangered astronauts, although
"Houston, we've had a problem" is what Jim Lovell actually said. It's a small
but important change, one more way that "Apollo 13" unfolds with perfect
immediacy, drawing viewers into the nail-biting suspense of a spellbinding true
story. You can know every glitch that made this such a dangerous mission, and
"Apollo 13" will still have you by the throat.

Better even than Mr. Howard's sure hand with this fascinating material is his
film's unexpected restraint. "Apollo 13" understands the difference between
movie bravado and real courage, and it celebrates the latter in inspiring ways
that have almost gone out of style. With Tom Hanks, wonderful again, as the
Everyman in the driver's seat, "Apollo 13" isn't afraid of the stone-cold fear
at the heart of this tale or of the intricate group effort needed to see it
through. This film and its brave, believable characters are uplifting in ways
that have nothing to do with a voyage to outer space.

We take it for granted today that there have been a hundred manned American
space flights, and that an astronaut can remain in orbit almost unnoticed for a
three-month stretch. But the weeklong adventure of the Apollo 13 crew unfolded
in a very different atmosphere. In April 1970, the space program still aroused
strong emotions: attention had begun to wane after the previous year's moon
walk, but the nation found itself desperately receptive to the astronauts'
unforeseen display of heroism after their flight became so perilous. "Apollo 13"
doesn't mention Vietnam, but it doesn't have to. The war-weary climate of that
time enhances this film's wishful, stirring faith in American know-how.

Like "Quiz Show," "Apollo 13" beautifully evokes recent history in ways that
resonate strongly today. Cleverly nostalgic in its visual style (Rita Ryack's
costumes are especially right), it harks back to movie making without phony
heroics and to the strong spirit of community that enveloped the astronauts and
their families. Amazingly, this film manages to seem refreshingly honest while
still conforming to the three-act dramatic format of a standard Hollywood hit.
It is far and away the best thing Mr. Howard has done (and "Far and Away" was
one of the other kind). Equally sound was casting his own mother (Jean Speegle
Howard) as Jim Lovell's mother, a real corker. "Are you boys in the space
program, too?" she sweetly asks the film's Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong.

"Apollo 13" makes it unsurprising that Jim Lovell ("no stranger to emergencies
he," a television commentator says) would come from sturdy stock. Mr. Lovell is
presented as a quietly gung-ho commander, the kind of man who tells his wife
(played brightly and affectingly by Kathleen Quinlan) that he's going to the
moon as if that's great news. For Mr. Lovell, on whose memoir, "Lost Moon"
(written with Jeffrey Kluger), the film is based, it actually was: he had come
tantalizingly close to the moon on the Apollo 8 flight and enthusiastically
looked forward to a lunar landing. Instead, on a mission whose original flight
plan was abruptly aborted, he was lucky to come home alive.

The science behind "Apollo 13" is detailed and specific, and the film conveys it
with superb simplicity. Easy as it would have been to sling showy high-tech
jargon, the screenplay (credited to William Broyles Jr. and Al Reinert) is
gratifyingly terse and clear. With a pitch-perfect ear for NASA syntax ("Come
on, rookie, park that thing"), the film stays informative while dealing with
arcane facts that became matters of life and death. You may see no more dazzling
display of ingenuity all year than the authentic way the film's NASA technicians
scramble with cardboard and duct tape to make a square peg fit a round hole.

In terms of realism, nothing else here comes close to the staggering fact that
some of the film's zero-gravity scenes were shot aboard a KC-135 NASA plane on a
steep parabolic orbit that earned it the nickname "vomit comet." Some may feel
that Mr. Hanks, Kevin Bacon and Bill Paxton, who play the astronauts so
expertly, deserve something better than the usual end-of-the-year recognition
for having even taken these roles.

These three stars (and their terrific backup teammates on the ground, especially
Gary Sinise as Ken Mattingly, an astronaut benched at the last minute because of
a measles scare, and Ed Harris as the nail-spitting flight commander, Gene
Kranz) capture an extraordinary verisimilitude. No film about space travel has
done a more realistic job of conveying the strangeness and exhilaration of such
exploits, not to mention the terror summed up by Mr. Bacon's Jack Swigert: "If
this doesn't work, we're not going to have the power to get home."

Crippled by the explosion of one of its oxygen tanks as it neared the moon, the
spaceship Odyssey experienced sudden electrical failures that forced the
astronauts to shut it down. They took refuge in their lunar exploration module,
the Aquarius, which was neither built nor programmed to bring three men back to
earth. Computer readjustments, navigational problems, lack of heat in space,
fear of incineration on re-entry, condensation that made the flight "a little
like trying to drive a toaster through a car wash": all these troubles are
grippingly dealt with in cinematically unconventional ways. When the guys in
this film frantically get out their slide rules, they're executing a gutsier
rescue than the maneuvers of any cape-wearing cartoon superhero.

Thanks largely to Mr. Hanks' foursquare presence here, the empathy factor for
"Apollo 13" is through the roof. This actor's way of amplifying the ordinary
side of an extraordinary character remains supremely fine-tuned. Playing the
tough, commanding Jim Lovell is a substantial stretch for Mr. Hanks, but as
usual his seeming ingenuousness overshadows all else about the role. There's not
a false move to anything he does on screen. Once again, he gives a performance
that looks utterly natural and is, in fact, subtly new.

The other principal performances are equally staunch, giving vivid, likable
impressions of characters whose rough edges have been only slightly smoothed.
(The fact that Gene Kranz liked to start his day listening to John Philip Sousa
marches, as reported in Andrew Chaikin's lucid Apollo overview, "A Man on the
Moon," is the kind of thing not dealt with by Mr. Harris's tight, steely
performance.)

Also notable about "Apollo 13": James Horner's rousing music, convincing rocket
scenes that don't come from NASA and an authentic glimpse of the role of
television reporting during the Apollo crisis. The news media can be faulted for
some of the behavior seen here, but Mr. Howard doesn't waste time taking those
potshots. Truly, "Apollo 13" has better things to do.

"Apollo 13" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It includes very mild
profanity and very brief sexual situations. Children old enough to follow its
story should love it -- and they'll find out how to go to the bathroom in space.


APOLLO 13

Directed by Ron Howard; written by William Broyles Jr. and Al Reinert, based on
the book "Lost Moon," by Jim Lovell and Jeffrey Kluger; director of photography,
Dean Cundey; edited by Mike Hill and Dan Hanley; music by James Horner, with
vocal performance by Annie Lennox; production designer, Michael Corenblith;
costumes by Rita Ryack; produced by Brian Grazer; released by Universal
Pictures. Running time: 135 minutes. This film is rated PG.

WITH: Tom Hanks (Jim Lovell), Kevin Bacon (Jack Swigert), Bill Paxton (Fred
Haise), Gary Sinise (Ken Mattingly), Ed Harris (Gene Kranz), Kathleen Quinlan
(Marilyn Lovell) and Jean Speegle Howard (Blanch Lovell).

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Three endangered astronauts on a fateful mission: Bill Paxton,
left, Kevin Bacon and Tom Hanks. (pg. C1); Kathleen Quinlan. (Ron
Batzdorff/Universal Pictures) (pg. C12)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              334 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

$25 and Under

BYLINE: By Eric Asimov

SECTION: Section C;     Page 24;     Column 3;     Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


When people refer to Continental restaurants, we know of which continent they
speak. These restaurants, jacks of all European cuisines but masters of none,
are no longer the epitome of culinary sophistication that they were in simpler
times before Calvin Trillin began making fun of them.

Now there is a new type of continental restaurant, and the continent is Asia.
Rain is the latest and most compelling of these restaurants. In Rain's case, the
dishes are derived primarily from Thailand, Vietnam and Malaysia.

Rain opened two months ago in the space previously occupied by Dish and has been
busy ever since. At 11 on a Saturday night, people are still being seated, with
a crowd spilling over into comfortable wicker chairs in a lounge near the bar.
The wide, high-ceiling dining room, with a polished wood floor, caramel-colored
walls and sparse Asian trim, is cleverly broken up with room dividers and
columns, accommodating couples in intimate cozy booths with illuminated Asian
prints, away from families with irrepressible children.

Like the Continental restaurants of yore, Rain takes dishes from various
countries, presents them in an atmosphere typical of none and adapts them for
Americans. The fact is, you can find many of Rain's dishes at Vietnamese or Thai
restaurants for a few dollars less. What you pay for here is presentation and
atmosphere typical of contemporary American restaurants, with pleasant, helpful
service and American desserts. And quite a bit of the food is very good.

Meals start with a basket of fresh shrimp chips, good by themselves or as
vehicles for the gently spiced peanut sauce. Cold Vietnamese summer rolls ($5)
are wonderfully cooling, the soft rice-flour wrappers stuffed with vegetables
and served with a fresh plum dipping sauce. Green papaya salad ($6), made with
slivers of unripe papaya, is fiery yet refreshing, a nice combination of pepper
and crunch.

Chicken and coconut soup ($4.50), flavored with lemongrass and kaffir lime,
rivals the richness of any Thai restaurant's version. Shrimp and chicken parcels
($7), dumplings in crisp envelopes, are pleasant but one-dimensional, not nearly
so good as the Vietnamese charred beef salad ($9), a spicy, beautifully
presented composition, flavored with lime and basil, that can be a main course
itself. Thai-style crab cakes ($8) are an example of a dish, Thai fish cakes,
adapted for Americans who are not usually fond of the Thai dish's characteristic
rubbery texture. The result, served in a coconut sauce, is crisper but bland.

Noodles are a weak point. Neither of the two famous Thai noodle dishes, pad Thai
($8) and mee krob ($9), is distinctive. Come to think of it, the same is true at
many Thai restaurants.

I had three terrific main courses. Stir-fried beef in peanut sauce ($13)
achieved a perfect balance between chili-induced heat, peanut creaminess and
citrus refreshment. The flavor of grilled salmon ($15), served in a banana leaf,
melded well with garlic and pepper, and stir-fried Chinese eggplant ($11) came
with an excellent yellow bean sauce, flavored with basil and vinegar. A dish
described as Thai rotisserie chicken ($10), served with sweet-and-sour sauce,
was considerably less interesting, with no apparent relationship between the
chicken and the sauce.

Rain offers more than a dozen beers, as well as a short wine list. Most of the
reds seem too light to stand up to this kind of food, but the Alsatian pinot
gris from Pierre Sparr ($19) goes well with it.

While bananas steamed in coconut milk ($5) and scented with mint are rich and
delicious, the star of the desserts -- better than indifferent coconut ice cream
($5) or crystallized ginger sorbet ($5) -- is a spectacularly rich chocolate
cake ($5). Maybe Rain is an intercontinental restaurant.

Rain

100 West 82d Street, Manhattan, (212) 501-0776.

Best dishes: Summer rolls, green papaya salad, chicken and coconut soup, charred
beef salad, stir-fried beef in peanut sauce, grilled salmon, stir-fried Chinese
eggplant, bananas steamed in coconut milk, chocolate cake.

Price range: $17 to $30 (for a three-course meal, excluding tax, tip and
beverages).

Credit cards: American Express, Mastercard, Visa.

Hours: 6 to 11 P.M. Mondays through Thursdays, until midnight Fridays; 5 P.M. to
midnight Saturdays; 5 to 10 P.M. Sundays.

Wheelchair access: Ramp to entrance; special restroom for wheelchairs.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              335 of 335 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Walking Tours, Music, Fireworks and Fairs

SECTION: Section C;  Page 23;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1588 words


The Fourth of July falls on Tuesday, but it will be celebrated all weekend long.
Here is a sampling of activities in the metropolitan region.

New York City

Today

HERITAGE TRAIL NEW YORK, lower Manhattan. Four free, self-guided walking tours
past 50 historic sites and attractions in lower Manhattan. The trails are
indicated by painted dots on the sidewalks and streets. A free brochure
indicating the trails is available at Federal Hall, Wall and Broad Streets; the
South Street Seaport, near Pier 17; World Trade Center Plaza, near Tower 2, and
Battery Park, south of Castle Clinton. A larger, more descriptive guidebook is
available for $5. Landmarks on the tours include the Tweed Courthouse, the
Vietnam War Veterans Memorial, Castle Clinton and the Shrine of St. Elizabeth
Ann Seton. Information: (212) 767-0637.


"WHAT PRICE FREEDOM," New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue and 42d Street,
Manhattan. A display of items from the library's collection illustrating the
effects of freedom on individuals and groups. Through Jan. 6. Hours: Mondays and
Thursdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Tuesdays and Wednesdays, 11 A.M.
to 6 P.M. Closed July 4. Free. Information: (212) 869-8089.

Tomorrow

"EMANCIPATION DAY: EARLY AFRICAN-AMERICAN NEW YORK CITY," Fraunces Tavern
Museum, 54 Pearl Street, financial district. A walking tour past sites from
black history, including the Five Points area, the home of Pierre Toussaint and
the Wall Street slave market. Meets at 1 P.M. at the northeast corner of
Chambers Street and Broadway. Fee: $10; $7 for museum members. Information:
(212) 425-1778.

MUSIC AND CRAFTS AT LINCOLN CENTER. A performance of works by Persichetti,
Schumann, Sousa and the world premiere of "Burnished Gold and Army Blue," a
march by John Cacavas; featuring the Goldman Band. Damrosch Park, 7 P.M. Free.
Information: (212) 944-1501. The American Crafts Festival will be held in the
plaza at Lincoln Center through Sunday and July 8 and 9 from noon to 9 P.M.
Information: (212) 677-4627.

INDEPENDENCE DAY FESTIVAL, Woodside Avenue, from Roosevelt Avenue to 65th Place,
Woodside, Queens. Entertainment, rides and international food.. 11 A.M. to 7
P.M. Information: (212) 995-9412.

BAY RIDGE ON THE EVE OF WAR, John Paul Jones Park, Fourth Avenue and Shore Road,
Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. John Gallagher, a historian and author, will discuss the
Battle of Brooklyn. 1 P.M. Sponsored by the Brooklyn Center for the Urban
Environment. Fee: $8; $3 for the elderly. Information: (718) 788-8549.

Sunday

REVOLUTIONARY NEW YORK. A walking tour of lower Manhattan past sites that
figured prominently in the Revolutionary War, including Fraunces Tavern and the
homes of George Washington, Benedict Arnold and Thomas Jefferson. Meets at 1
P.M. on the front steps of City Hall. Sponsored by Big Onion Tours. Fee: $9; $7
for students and the elderly. Information: (212) 439-1090.

COLONIAL SETTLERS OF WALL STREET. A walking tour. Meets at noon at Trinity
Church, Broadway and Wall Street. Sponsored by Joyce Gold History Tours. Fee:
$12. Information: (212) 242-5762.

July 4

MACY'S FIREWORKS. Two consecutive displays. The first, at 9:15 P.M., will be in
lower Manhattan, with best viewing in Manhattan between Broad Street and the
Brooklyn Bridge and in Brooklyn Heights along the Heights promenade. The second,
at 9:30 P.M., in midtown, can be seen along Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive between
14th and 42d Streets and any point in Brooklyn or Queens with a clear view of
the East River. On Roosevelt Island, the southern tip of the island will have
seating for viewing. Cost, $10, plus $2.80 tram fare. Information: (212)
832-4540. A musical simulcast can be heard from 9:15 to 9:50 P.M. on WPLJ-FM
(95.5). A live broadcast can be seen on Channel 11, beginning at 9 P.M.

FIREWORKS CRUISES. Viewing of the Macy's fireworks display aboard several boats.
A cruise aboard the Circle Line leaves at 8 P.M. from Pier 83, West 43d Street
and the Hudson River; tickets, $35; $17.50 for children 12 and younger.
Information: (212) 563-3200. Seaport Liberty Cruises offers a cruise with music
leaving at 7:30 P.M. from Pier 16 at the South Street Seaport; tickets, $40.
Information: (212) 630-8888. A formal dinner cruise aboard World Yacht leaves at
7 P.M. from Pier 81, West 41st Street and the Hudson River; tickets, $195 per
person. Information: (212) 630-8100.  A cruise with music and dancing is
sponsored by Affairs Afloat on the Queen of Hearts, a New Orleans-style
paddle-wheeler. The boat leaves at 6:30 P.M. from Pier 9 at Wall Street and the
East River; cost, $50 person ($40 a person for groups of four or more).
Information: (212) 289-8506. Another cruise with music will be offered by New
York Waterway. Boats leave at 7:15 P.M. from pier at the World Financial Center,
North End Avenue and Vesey Street; and at 7:30 P.M. from Hoboken, the pier at
the train station; Jersey City, the pier at Exchange Place; and Weehawken,
Pershing Road and the Hudson River. Tickets: $35; $17.50 for children.
Information: (800) 533-3779.

"I'M A YANKEE DOODLE DANDY: A SALUTE TO GEORGE M. COHAN," Woodlawn Cemetery,
entrance at Jerome and Bainbridge Avenues, Woodlawn, the Bronx. A performance by
the Bronx Arts Ensemble Jazz and Dixieland Band, featuring music by Cohan,
Irving Berlin, Duke Ellington, W. C. Handy, Victor Herbert and Miles Davis. 2
P.M. Free. Information: (718) 601-7399 or (718) 920-0500.

Hudson Valley

Tomorrow

CELEBRATE AMERICA, Museum Village, Route 17W, Exit 16 off Thruway, Monroe. A
19th-century celebration of the nation's birth with pie-eating contests, sack
races and other contests. Noon to 5 P.M. Also Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Admission:
$8; $6 for the elderly; $5 for children 3 to 15 years old; under 3, free.
Information: (914) 782-8247.

INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Dutchess County Fairgrounds, Route 9, Rhinebeck.
With the Royal Hanneford Circus, rides, a flea market, food and fireworks. 10
A.M. Circus admission: $7; $5 for children 6 to 10 years old. Free admission to
fairgrounds. Information: (914) 876-4001.

July 4

18TH-CENTURY INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Route 9, Croton-on-Hudson. 10 A.M. to
5 P.M. Admission: $7; $6 for ages 6 to 17; under 6, free. Information: (914)
631-8200.

OLD-FASHIONED FOURTH OF JULY CELEBRATION, Manitoga, Route 9D, Garrison. 3 P.M.
to dusk. Admission: $5; families, $15. Information: (914) 424-3812.

INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Sunnyside, Route 9, Tarrytown. An 1855 celebration
with speeches, a brass band and a juggler. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Admission: $7; $6
for the elderly; $4 for ages 6 to 17; free for children under 6. Information:
(914) 591-8763.

Long Island

Sunday

FIREWORKS '95 IN MONTAUK, Umbrella Beach. 9 P.M. Information: (516) 668-2428.

"OVER THERE PLUS 50," Hempstead Town Park, Point Lookout. A celebration honoring
World War II veterans, with music, an aerial fly-by and fireworks. 8 P.M. Free.
Information: (516) 431-3900.

July 4

"A BABYLON BOY IN REVOLUTIONARY TIMES," Conklin House, Deer Park Avenue,
Babylon. A historical pageant sponsored by the Babylon Village Youth Project. 11
A.M. Free. Information: (516) 587-7117.

19TH-CENTURY INDEPENDENCE CELEBRATION, Old Bethpage Village Restoration, Round
Swamp Road, Old Bethpage. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Admission: $5; $3 for children 5 to
12 years old. Information: (516) 572-0223.

VICTORIAN FOURTH OF JULY, Raynham Hall Museum, 20 West Main Street, Oyster Bay.
10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Free. Information: (516) 922-6808.

New Jersey

Tomorrow

PATRIOTIC MUSIC, courtyard, Ocean County Library, 101 Washington Street, Toms
River. The Garden State Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus. 7:30 P.M. Free, but
take your own seating. Information: (908) 349-6277.

GREAT SOUSA CONCERT, Great Auditorium, Pilgrim Pathway, Ocean Grove. Allentown
Band, conducted by Ronald Demkee. 8 P.M. Tickets: $12, general admission; $15
for reserved seats. Information: (908) 775-0035.

Sunday

INDEPENDENCE DAY 1935 CELEBRATION, Historic Allaire Village, Route 524, Allaire
State Park, Allaire. Noon to 4 P.M. Free; parking: $3. Information: (908)
938-2253.

July 4

READING OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE, Morristown National Historical Park,
Washington Place, Morristown, N.J. 2 P.M. Free. Information: (201) 539-2085.
 OLD GLORY WEEKEND, Waterloo Village, Exit 25 off Route 80, Stanhope. 10 A.M. to
6 P.M. Restored historic village will be the site of Revolutionary War
re-enactment. Admission: $8; $7 for the elderly; $6 for children 6 to 15 years
old; under 6 free. Information: (201) 347-0900.

Connecticut

Sunday

FIREWORKS AT LIME ROCK PARK, Route 112, Lakeville. Sponsored by the Salisbury
Rotary Club. 9 P.M. Admission: $3; $2 for children 12 and under. Spectators
should take seating. Information: (800) 722-3577.

July 4

INDEPENDENCE DAY AT MYSTIC SEAPORT, Exit 90 off Interstate 95, Mystic. An 1870's
celebration with a parade, games and other activities. 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $16; $15 for the elderly; $8 for children 6 to 15 years old; under 6,
free. Information: (203) 572-5315.

FIREWORKS IN PORTLAND. A fireworks display over the Connecticut River seen from
the vessel Aunt Polly, leaving Yankee Boat Yard at 7 P.M. and returning at 10
P.M. Tickets: $25; $20 for children under 15 years old. Sponsored by the Greater
Middletown Preservation Trust. Information: (203) 346-1646.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 1, 1995, Saturday

CORRECTION:

A listing of Fourth of July events in Weekend yesterday misstated the day for a
concert by the Goldman Band at Damrosch Park in Lincoln Center. The concert is
at 7 P.M. tomorrow, not tonight.


TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
